Modules 9, 10, 11

The Gothic cathedrals built between 1137 and 1284 are still among the most
impressive works of architecture ever conceived and built. Even after decades
of contemporary historical and technical analysis, it's difficult to imagine
the will and technical skill required to erect structures of this scale and
inventiveness. The Gothic era differed not only in the sophistication of
construction, but also in these ways that we've looked at before. The visible
process of building in daily life within the urban centers, which were emerging
to be more secure loci of organized trade and religious activity, really
distinguished the Gothic Cathedrals from those of the Romanesque ancestors. The
Bible and other religious texts were being used by theologians such as the
Abbey Suger who sought ways to create materializations of religious thought in
literature, the arts, and in architecture in particular, and this is one that
he was responsible for, which is San Denis on the left. The churches and
cathedrals had long been considered the "house of the Lord." There was a move
to materialize faith in construction in very particular ways. Building
knowledge was passed along by master builders through the apprentice system.
Invention was encouraged by the increasing ambition of clients trying to outdo
each other with the magnificence of construction and apprentices trying to
surpass their masters for religious and professional glory. While most master
builders and their crews have remained anonymous, there are surviving documents
from masters that would today be considered architects such as Suger, William
of Sens, and Villard de Honnecourt. Villard de Honnecourt lived in 13th century
France and may have been an itinerant master-builder of Picardy in northern
France. His fame rests entirely on his surviving portfolio of 33 sheets of
parchment containing about 250 drawings from the 1230s, which is still in the
Bibliotheque Nationale in Paris. We see a couple of pages from that in front of
us here. It appears to be a model-book, with a wide range of religious and
secular figures suitable for sculpture, architectural plans, elevation details,
ecclesiastical objects, etc. Villard traveled through many of the cathedral
building sites, other places in 13th century France, and he recorded the
construction work in his sketchbook in great detail. Of particular interest are
the drawings of the Laon, cathedral bell towers and the Reims cathedral nave
being built, they provide valuable clues for building techniques of High Gothic
architecture. Now let's look at the structural ideas here, they're really quite
simple by themselves, but they become quite complex when they're magnified.
Structural vaults had been known for a millennia emerging from Mesopotamia,
Greece, and Rome, and the Romanesque architecture. The Gothic structures
reduced the weight of the vaults through the use of thin stone ribs that
carried the stress lines from the roof down through the piers and into the
foundations. You see that on the complex rib vault on the right. That sort of
classic pointed Gothic arch. These developments precipitated a rapid
advancement in building technology and a burgeoning system of crafts training
and production methods. Nor was this development limited to stone. Notice the
joined wood trusses required to hold the stone ribs in place during
construction. So you have this structure, very lightweight, very complex in
itself, holding up the stone until it can be load-bearing. This wood vaulted
nave uses a "hammer-beam" construction joining roof system to the bearing walls
in the larger structure. Most wooden truss systems played a secondary
supportive role and were often hidden behind elaborative decorative ceilings,
so you wouldn't actually see these, attached to the trusses or used in assembly
halls. Let's look at the difference between some earlier Gothic and late Gothic
structures in terms of scale of interior space. The effect of increasing
lightness and height of these structures can be seen in the sectional
comparison of Sens and Notre Dame, which are separated only by about 75 years.
The diagram in the upper left shows the height that can be obtained with a high
pointed "Gothic" arch, which is like this; the force is coming straighter down
to the ground versus the flatter arch which pushes more of the force out
laterally. As the wall systems became lighter and penetrated with a greater
amount of stained glass, the external flying buttress system became more and
more elaborate, as you see on the right-hand slide of Notre Dame. Let's talk a
little bit about San Denis, which scholars usually say is the first true Gothic
structure, and this of course was sort of set up by Abbey Suger, and he was
responsible for interpreting theological ideas and construction that came from
Aquinas and others. They feature very light construction. They emphasize space
filled with light. The lines of the structure begin to define that area.
Geometry, the controlling geometry was very important because it was connected
with religious text, and the overall lightness of the structure. As a royal
abbey, St. Denis was a symbol of royal power, and what was done to it rebounded
the glory of both the monarch and France. In the light gray on the inside, you
can see the earlier chapel that Abbey Suger was responsible for enlarging. Its
renovation was a political, as well as an architectural and religious event.
Suger was in a position to kind of realize the fact of this sort of great,
symbolic value of architecture. His status as Abbot made him one of the most
powerful men in France. He was actively engaged in the French political life
and virtually ran the kingdom while King Louis VII was away on a crusade. A
fervent patriot, Suger never hesitated to identify the best interests of the
King: France, Church, Abbey, God. In short, his plan was to outdo Hagia Sophia
in grandeur and it ultimately became the model for most of the late
12th-century French cathedrals, including those at Chartres and Senlis. Here we
see the three classic elements of the Gothic wall, the clerestory, the
triforium and the arcade. Gradually this became lighter and lighter, so the
area could be filled with more and more stained glass. You can see the major
structural forces are visible to just about anyone. They follow the lines of
the rib down from the roof through the piers into the foundation. You're
literally and figuratively encased in the bones of the church, or the metaphor
as "the bones of Christ." Ones of the great advances of this cathedral was
the amount of stained glass used in the walls. As Suger remarks:
"The church would have the most radiant windows," you can see two views of
that here, "it would illuminate men's minds so that they may travel
through apprehension of God's light." Okay, allegories of color were not
fixed then any more than they are now, in fact they were sometimes reversed;
red often represented earthly passion, the sanguinity of blood, and the
corporeal body was blue, "the color of heaven," but those were often switched.
But you can see the predominant colors here are red and blue. They were
identified with spiritual aspiration, celestial sky, and the promise of
eternity. Naturally, the two colors could be seen easily in dualistic tension
of life as embattled humans have always been torn between two natures: body and
soul, material and immaterial, heaven and earth. These structural innovations
would continue to be magnified by William of Sens in the High Gothic at St
Etienne, Laon, Notre Dame, and Chartres. The structural spans became larger,
naves became higher, and walls became lighter and more transparent. You can see
that in these examples here. Until finally, we get to the sort of the ultimate
in Gothic cathedrals in terms of height at Beauvais. The choir has always been
wholeheartedly admired, say by Eugene Viollet-le-Duc, called the Beauvais
choir, which reached 157 feet, the Parthenon of French Gothic. Unfortunately,
the building exceeded the material limits and collapsed. The nave was rebuilt
later. We see the choir here, and this collapse is often seen as a disaster
that produced a failure and nerve among French masons working the Gothic style;
but more modern historians, such as Stephen Murray note that the collapse also
ushers in the age of smaller structures associated with demographic decline,
the Hundred Years War, beginning of the 13th century and a whole new attitude
about building and symbol in architecture. So here we see essentially the end
of the high Gothic period.

For over 300 years, Gothic construction, highlighted by spectacular and
expensive church building, dominated the urban landscape. These structures were
meant to last through the ages, commemorating the fact that everyone had made
it past the millennium. A particularly vivid example is the cathedral at Rheims
which survived dozens of artillery hits during World War One. From at least the
800s, Chartres was an important pilgrimage site which housed the Sancta Camisa,
or the supposed tunic of the Virgin Mary. The great cathedral that we see here
today was preceded by five previous cathedrals. Exceeded in scale and grandeur
by few other cathedrals, Chartres builders achieved this effect with relatively
efficient means. Many scholars consider Chartres to be the finest example of a
High Gothic church. Look at the plan. The plan has remarkably thin columns to
achieve this effect. Less constrained than their continental counterpoints,
English Gothic churches emerged roughly in the High Gothic period in France in
comparison to that, and extended into the early 16th century. These churches
tended to be less encumbered with dense urban settlements, often resulting in
more extended plans as in the case of Salisbury Cathedral. Structural systems
were less elaborate, and we can see here in the plan, and more attention was
placed on surface decoration. The plan is intriguing, because it almost appears
as if the extended choir in Trinity Chapel at the right-hand side of the image
were added at a later date to the nave. However, the majority of the cathedral
was built in a unified style in a relatively short period between 1220 and
1258. As we can see here in the King's College Chapel constructed towards the
end of the Gothic period in England, the fan tracery, it's well named of
course, that you see on the vaults, creates a stunning visual effect, but they
serve absolutely no structural function. The basic premises of the Gothic that
express the bones of the building is beginning to disappear here. Interesting
too, is that the walls virtually disappear due to the almost floor to ceiling
application of stained glass. The Italians, whose skill with masonry bearing
walls never really abated after the fall of the Roman Empire, achieved interior
spaces of comparable scale without significant flying buttresses and extensive
stained glass walls, preferring instead to ornament every conceivable surface
with polychromy, paintings, sculptures, and byzantine style mosaics, etc. In
the Cathedral at Siena, or Il Duomo, which is Italian for dome, refers to the
major church of a town, we can see the results of these interests. The
simplicity of the plan belies the rich surface ornamentation created
architecturally by alternate bands of white and green, almost black marble,
recalling the black and white colors associated with the founding of Siena. You
can see that very clearly in these aerials. You can see the remains of an
extension of the church. It was planned to extend perpendicularly transforming
the nave into a crossing. It would have rivaled St. Peters in scale. It was
never completed due to an outbreak of a plague or unsafe foundations, and some
speculate the anger of Rome at being potentially upstaged through a great
architectural construction. At the intersection of three ridges where the
principle roads meet is the great public piazza created in the 12th century in
Siena called Il Campo, or the "field". The spatial effect of the campo is
achieved by a consistent height of facade articulation of the surrounding
buildings; a scalloped shell-shaped surface divided into nine parts signifying
the ruling oligarchy of the Council of Nine marks the ground. The campo is
marked also by a magnificent slender Gothic tower, or campanile, that emerges
from the public space. The entry structure and interior space of this is known
as the Cappella della Piazza, or the Chapel of the Piazza. These two
campaniles, the one that's seen on the left, and the one in Bruge, are
architectural announcements of the emerging power of the merchant class.
Geometrically defined public space around these landmarks from Siena and Bruges
in Belgium, create the "civic space" and consequently a political body as a
distinct spacial form. These public buildings announce the most prominent space
within the city of Florence, and they act as symbolic and sculptural context
for the display of civic virtue and artistic talent, obviously supported by the
ruler. You can see here we have Giotto's great late Gothic Campanile. On the
west side for instance, we have The Planets; south side, we see displays of the
three Theological and four Cardinal Virtues; the east side, several "Liberal
Arts;" on the north side, the Seven Sacraments, etc. So, it's really kind of a
symbolic tower more than a functional one. Through this work, Giotto became,
together with Brunelleschi he created the dome of the Cathedral of Florence,
we'll see later, and Alberti, his treatise on architecture, also in the
Renaissance. He was one of the founding fathers of the Italian Renaissance
movement. Italian monarchs enjoyed a close political and economic relationship
with Rome and they became increasingly powerful as their cities developed into
economic and political machines. The Doge's Palace here in Venice is a great
example of that. This section of a Gothic style Palazzo, or major palace, on
the Grand Canal in Venice demonstrates the use of stone facade construction,
usually reserved for religious or royal buildings during the Gothic era.
Consequently, it demonstrates the power of the merchant class, as well as how
commercial space on the canal level are integrated with business and family
apartments on the upper level. You can see that organization, and it's quite
complex. The Milan Cathedral is one of the last great Gothic structures
undertaken in Italy. It was begun in the late 14 century and extended,
actually, into the Renaissance. You can pick this out by noticing the
classically derived pediments over the main entrance and other windows
indicating the date of these insertions. Again, the church faces a significant
open piazza, where there was an earlier basilica located as all roads lead to
the major civic space and the major institutional building. It has a ground
plan of a nave with four aisles, crossed by a transept and then followed by a
choir and apse. What would be exposed buttress on most French Gothic structures
becomes enclosed, creating a more expansive interior. The height of the nave is
about 45 meters. It's the highest Gothic vault of any complete church, less the
48 meters we saw at Beauvais, that collapsed. And we looked at that in the last
lecture. We've alluded to the importance of the cathedral in the town plan, but
let's look at two urban plans that epitomize different attitudes, different
medieval attitudes, towards towns and cities. The first is Carcassonne, which
had a more organic order that developed over time. We tend to associate that
with most medieval settlements. Interestingly, it was established by the Romans
as a colonial with a very castral-like plan at its core. Carcassonne developed
into the quintessential fortified medieval city. Its strategic importance on a
hilltop, along major trade routes is underscored by the significant layered
walls and bastions. Notice that the scale of the castle keep, which is over
there to the right, outranks the cathedral in this town. As an aside, a
nineteenth century architect named Viollet-le-Duc, who would be a pioneer in
the revival of the Gothic in the 19th century, helped restore Carcassonne. He
made the error of using slate and restoring the rooves as pointed cones, thus
it fit the image of Gothic. But the local practice was to use tile roofing and
very low slopes. Bastides, the other type, have a very obvious connection to
the Roman military castrum, remnants of which can be found in the oldest areas
of communities throughout Europe: Carcassonne obviously, Arles, Avignon, Nimes,
Bordeaux, etc. The uniform procedure in constructing a bastide began with the
setting up of a pale by the founder's agent to mark the site and indicate
boundaries of the town, which approximated a rectangle as closely as possible
to the topography in case you had something... if the topography was very steep
it became more difficult. Streets were usually straight and meeting at right
angles. They divided the area into plots that were designated for houses which
had gardens, often crossed by secondary streets in the rear. Beyond the gardens
were common fields or uncultivated land. Many bastides were built without
walls, this one happens to have one, consequently, and without gates, making it
necessary for tolls to be collected in the marketplace itself. This arrangement
was not directed against the inhabitants of the bastide, who were granted
exemption. Nevertheless, the power of the sovereign to police the marketplace
underscores the space's ambivalence, neither public property possessed by the
inhabitants, nor privately owned by a feudal lord. In founding a bastide, a
lord expressed his will to rule. The novelty of the bastide was such, the power
was no longer wrenched from the grips of an enemy purely by military strength,
but rather prized by its holder by steady, intentional, economic pressure
exerted in part by the rigorous hierarchy of space and property organized by
the grid plan of the bastide. It sort of goes like this: "The rules of order
which cities have formed certify also those of the state by which they are
ruled. Visible in each city is he who rules it and how it's ruled," a quote
from Wolfgang Braunfels.

Cultures in the Americas tended to develop in a somewhat autonomous manner due
to often vast distances between them, and also their north-south distribution.
Responses to environmental influences, locally available materials, and
building practices were quite diverse. We're most familiar with the more
complex cultures of Mesoamerica, Aztecs, Maya and Inca civilizations whose
constructions rivaled the pyramids in terms of scale. But, let's take a look at
some other cultures. The mound builders in North America developed significant
earthwork-based settlements. Even before the conquest many of these sites were
abandoned and became overgrown. Until recently, we were left with the
impression that these cultures were simply primitive groups satisfying only the
basic needs of dwellings and simple communal structures, but on a very small
scale. The fact remains that many of these settlements are very impressive. The
Cahokia Mounds in Illionois is the largest and earliest pre-Columbian
settlement north of Mexico. It was occupied principally during the
Mississippian period, about 800 to 1350, and it covered almost 4,000 acres and
included some 120 mounds. This is the pre-eminent example of a cultural,
religious, and economic center of the Mississippian cultural tradition which
extended throughout the Mississippi Valley and the southeastern United States.
It was an agricultural society that could have had up to 10,000, 20,000 people
at its peak between 1050 and 1150. Cahokia is an early and exceptional example
of a pre-urban structuring. This is reflected in the size, the layout of the
settlement, and the nature and structure of the public and private buildings.
Florida contains some of the highest concentration of indigenous sites in North
America, which is surprising. For example, recent excavations have identified a
circular construction at the mouth of the Miami River on Biscayne Bay. You can
see that on the upper right hand side just after the excavations.
Archaeologists are now convinced that these cultures were keenly aware of the
cycle of seasons and the celestial bodies, which are reflected in the
orientation of sites and buildings towards the positions of the sun and stars.
In the 17th century, an Apalachee Indian site near Tallahassee was occupied by
a Spanish mission and renamed San Luis. For many years, the two groups shared a
public gathering space near a Spanish church and the Apalachee council house
which you can see here, reconstructed. In the broadest sense, the village
council house symbolized the bond of the community. It was primarily the
property of the chief and the symbol of his authority that held all of his
people together, which counteracted divisive forces resulting from the
village's very dispersed settlement pattern. There's a direct correlation
between the village's population and the size of the council house; some held
between 2,000 and 3,000 people. At over 140 feet in diameter, this Apalachee
council house at San Luis is the largest known historic-era Indian building in
the Southeast. Chaco Canyon, in the southwest of the United States, served as a
major urban center of ancestral Puebloan culture. It's remarkable for its
monumental public and ceremonial buildings and engineering projects; astronomy,
artistic achievements, and a very distinctive architecture. It served as a hub
of ceremony, trade, and administration for the prehistoric Four Corners area in
this region for over 400 years. Spanish explorers identified the Chaco Canyon
area as "Chaca," a Spanish colonial word commonly used in that era meaning "a
large expanse of open, unexplored land, desert, prairie." Chaca's also believed
to be the origin of both "Chacra" and "Chaco." This term may also be a Spanish
translation of a Navajo word meaning "rock-cut" or "canyon," that seems more
likely; or perhaps a "white string of rocks." The latter refers to the
appearance of sandstone atop the Chakra Mesa. Now two of the most renown of
these are Pueblo Bonito, that you can see here, it's very circular,
semi-circular form, and Mesa Verde. These structures are constructed of adobe
bricks and oriented towards the sun and the cardinal points. The circular
structures seen in both of these images are kivas. They're enclosed spaces for
religious and ceremonial, communal ceremonies. Further to the south the great
cultures of the Olmecs, the Mexicas, the Toltecs, and the Maya developed sites
that rivaled those of Giza, Persepolis, and Hellenistic and Roman city forms.
This map emphasizes two of those, the Aztec and Maya civilizations, just before
the Spanish conquest. The Olmec site ofLa Venta in present day state of
Tabasco was one of the oldest known pyramidal constructions in Mesoamerica,
established planning, building and religious practices that would be developed
in cultures that followed after this. And because of this, the Olmecs are
considered or often referred to as the "Mother Culture" of Mesoamerica. This
site contains an effigy of a volcano aligned on a north south axis; you can see
that on the left. It's flanked by a series of sunken courts and terminated by a
smaller mound to the right. These structures define a ritualized landscape that
was inhabited by priests and their entourage. Houses of the workers would have
surrounded this religious precinct. The dynamic nature of volcanic landscape
was highly influential in Mesoamerican rituals, monumental architecture, and
art, an aspect that continues today even in Mexican art. You can see Diego
Rivera's mural of Tenochtitlan up on the left with Iztaccihuatl, or the "White
Woman" in the background, and one of Dr. Atl's, from his Paricutin series on
the right. The main axis at Tenochtitlan, this is a Nahuatl name meaning "Where
Men Become Gods." It's about three miles in length. This is a Googled image
from the left, and you can see that in the plan on the right here. It's aligned
about 15 degrees east of true north, and most scholars that I've read suggest
that the target is probably Cerro Gordo, which is a volcano in the distance.
This axis is known as the Avenue of the Dead and it terminates in the
Pyramid of the Moon. This Teotihuacan axis, you can see the larger of the two
pyramids of the Sun seen at the inset, faces the rising sun, and unfortunately,
and to UNESCOs side more recently, a super WALMART! This map of
Tenochtitlan which was built after the abandonment of Teotihuacan.
It's attributed to Hernan Cortes and his correspondence with the emperor
Charles V. Cortes' letters and reports represent some of the earliest European
accounts of Mexican people, culture, religion, and history. The accompanying
map is the first European image in print of Tenochtitlan, or Mexico City, and
the Gulf Coast of Mexico. The plan shows a large, complex city with the main
temple precinct, plazas, houses, principal thoroughfares, causeways, lakes,
suburbs, and towns along the shore. An amazing construction, it just blew the
Europeans away. The map draws on both European and indigenous sources. In the
upper right is interesting, it's the town of Mexcaltitan in the State of
Nayarit, on the west coast, said to be the fable city of the origin of the
Mexican people, who came to found Tenochtitlan. The drawing in the lower right
depicts the founding of the city when an eagle holding a snake lands upon a
Nopal cactus marking the proper spot for the founding of that city. The Mexica
used east as up on the map, but I turned the map towards the now conventional
north so you can imagine it in the map of Mexico City. Here we see an aerial
reconstruction of Tenochtitlan. There's a model from the Museum of Anthropology
there on the left. It gives you an idea of the scale of the city at the time of
Cortez' invasion, which some people say could have numbered between 100 to
200,000 people. The major pyramid is superimposed in the ruins in the center of
Mexico City, which you can see in the inset, upper right.   Generally known as
the Aztec Calendar this sculpture, more accurately called the Sun Stone,
depicts the Aztec calendar, or a way of keeping track of the world. It actually
has two more or less independent systems. One calendar has 365 days. It
describes the days and rituals related to the seasons, and we might call that
the agricultural year, the solar year. The other calendar has 260 days and is
considered to be the sacred calendar. The alignment of these rotating cycles
displays the continuing struggle between the intertwined worlds of gods and
men. Regardless of its interpretation or this use of the stone, it symbolizes
the driving force behind ancient settlements. Despite the differences in scale,
construction and specific cultural rituals, they are, according to Kostof,
between cosmos and polity, that give shape to fear and to exorcise it, to
infect a reconciliation of knowledge and the unknowable. That's the charge of
ancient architecture.

Let's continue our discussion of Mesoamerican sites by looking at Chichen Itza
in the Yucatan Peninsula. Chichen Itza means at the mouth of the well of the
Itza, the Itza people. The central temple that we see here in the center of
Kulkukan, that's the Mayan name for Quetzalcoatl, the plumed serpent, dominates
the plan in this aerial imagery. As with all sites in the Maya area, the
vegetation would have been cleared away leaving extensive open spaces for
rituals, festivals, and markets. For most or all ancient Mesoamerican cultures,
they had a four-directional symbolic-spatial cosmology. The cardinal
directions, which creates this cross we've seen in other cultures, the
directions each are associated with particular deities, colors, birds, trees,
and other symbolic elements, they were very important components of
Mesoamerican mythology, cosmology, and ritual practice. Simply stated, an
orientation is an alignment with a purpose. And, interestingly, many
Mesoamerican sites like Chichen are aligned slightly east of north. You see
here I've tilted the image to kind of get it correct. North is directly up
here. The ritual path, called a Sacbe, connects in this case, the main temple
of Kulkukan, with the sacred cenote. You can see that at the bottom of the left
hand slide. Sacbeob, which is the plural of Sacbe, connected various urban
areas to each other as well. The Maya believed that connections with the Cenote
were a joint or a link to the underworld. Rivers were only underground so these
geographic features, indeed the whole necessity of water, took on a significant
role in their culture. The Caracol, or shell, at the lower right hand side, is
considered by most scholars to be an astronomical observatory, which is aligned
to key points in the Mayan calendar. Here's the temple of Kulkulkan, which is
on the day of the summer solstice. You can see the shadow creates, for a
moment, this image of a serpent coming from the top to the bottom. You can see
that their understanding of the calendar is really quite sophisticated. Here it
creates the body of Kulkulkan, that's the serpent connecting the priest at the
summit with the head of the serpent at the base. Here's a Cenote, and we would
call these sink holes, and it's a Karst topography, very similar to that of
northern Florida, it's punctuated by these sink holes, or Cenotes, as they're
called. Their natural formation are places where the surface limestone has
collapsed, exposing the subterranean water table. And these open caverns were
the only reliable sources of water for the larger community. They were
supplanted by Aguadas or ponds that might not outlast the dry season, so you
can see both the practical and the symbolic importance here. At the high point
of Puuc architecture, buildings were decorated with carefully cut veneer stones
set into a concrete core. This method is considered an architectural advance
beyond the earlier Maya technique of using larger stones, set on top of one
another in a lime and mud mortar for structural support. The concrete
core-veneer masonry, very similar to that which the Romans used, allowed for
slightly larger and more stable interior rooms. The lower portion of the
facades are blank with this flat surface of rectangular blocks punctuated by
doorways, while the upper facade is richly decorated with intricate stone
mosaics, often alternating repeated geometric elements with more elaborate
figurative sculpture. Look at this case where the long-nosed masks of the Mayan
rain god, Chaac, are found on many Puuc buildings. You can see examples of this
in the two slides here. This is an example of what we call the corbel arch, and
it's essentially an arch that's not using a curve. It's limited in its ability
to span significant distances. Interior ritual space was relatively
insignificant of the Mesoamericans. They were never compelled to invent greater
structural spans where structural spans were concerned, basically because they
didn't need the interior space. All major civic and religious rituals unfolded
in the landscape. Consequently, the buildings are seen as an object or almost
like a mountain within that structure. Let's look at a great Maya site which is
in the current country of Guatemala. It's in the el Peten region. It's one of
the most significant Maya ceremonial sites. The site represents the cultural
evolution of the Maya for hunting and gathering to farming with elaborate
religious, artistic and scientific culture which eventually collapsed in the
late 9th century C.E. There are over 3,000 separate buildings dating from 600
B.C.E. to 900 C.E., including water control infrastructure, temples,
residences, and religious monuments. The population at its height may have been
as high as 90,000 people. The extreme slope of these temples in the main plaza
is impressive. It's important to remember the jungle would have been cut back
away from the public space, so our image of these ruins as kind of romantic,
isolated monuments is developed from images from the 19th century such as the
one in the upper right-hand corner by Frederick Catherwood. He went there with
Stephens in the 19th century. This partial plan shows the extent of the
excavated temple structure, the location of Temple II in the great plaza,
that's kind of in the center, where the image we just saw is. If you remember
the Star Wars sequence where the death star is appearing on the horizon of the
rebel base, that star over to the left, the camera there is perched on the top
of Temple IV, and we're looking towards Temple II and the Great Plaza there on
sort of the left-hand side of the screen. Perhaps no site in the Americas so
clearly demonstrates the intimate relationship between architecture and
landscape as Machu Picchu in Peru. You can see Machu Picchu down on the lower
left and it's right on the Rio Urubamba. The city is cut into the steep
topography with a series of platforms and terraces that support agriculture,
domestic, civic and religious functions. Alignments are made towards key
mountains wherein the major gods resided. The Intihuatana stone here, we refer
to it as the hitching post of the sun, is arranged to a point directly at the
sun during the winter solstice. The name of the stone, coined perhaps by the
archeologist Hiram Bingham III, who "found the site", at least from western
terms, he described "an instrument or place" to "tie the sun," often expressed
in English as "The Hitching Post of the Sun." Because the stone was believed to
hold the sun in place along its annual path through the sky, midday on March 21
and September 21, the equinoxes, the sun stands almost above the pillar,
casting absolutely no shadow at all. Okay, we're jumping across the Atlantic
now to Zimbabwe. This site is called the Great Zimbabwe, and it's essentially
where the country gets its name. The vast stone ruins of the Great Zimbabwe
take up similar topics in making a place in the landscape through construction.
When Portuguese traders first encountered the vast stone ruins of the Great
Zimbabwe in the 16th century, they believed they had found the fabled capital
of the Queen of Sheba. Later travelers surmised that the site's impressive
stone structures were the work of Egyptians, Phoenicians, or even Prester John,
the legendary Christian king of lands beyond the Islamic realm. Such romantic
speculations held for nearly 400 years, until the excavations of British
archaeologists, David Randall-MacIver and Gertrude Caton-Thompson early in this
century. They confirmed that the ruins were definitely of African origin. The
largest ancient stone construction south of Sahara, the Great Zimbabwe was
built between the 12th and 15th centuries by the ancestors of the Shona, one of
Zimbabwe's many Bantu-speaking groups. The ruins cover nearly 1,800 acres and
can be divided into three distinct architectural groups known as the Hill
Complex, the Valley Complex, and the Great Enclosure that we're seeing here. At
its apogee in the late 14th century, Great Zimbabwe may have had as many as
18,000 inhabitants. It was one of some 300 known stone enclosures on the
Zimbabwe Plateau. In Bantu, Zimbabwe means "sacred house" or the "ritual seat
of a king." It was an important trading center and the capital of the Medieval
Zimbabwe state, the city controlled much of the interior of southeast Africa
for almost two centuries. Now we're back to one of my favorite subjects, which
are buildings carved out of solid stone. Here we're looking at Lalibela in
Ethiopia. King Lalibela constructed 11 rock-hewn churches in his capital, Roha;
each was cut out of solid red volcanic rock. Some of the churches lie almost
completely hidden in the deep trenches, while others stand open in quarried
caves. You see a couple of examples here. These churches were interconnected by
a maze of tunnels and passages with openings to hermit caves and catacombs.
Some are of the basilica type, having archaic features and imitating
architectural elements from earlier periods. They differ in design and style.
Two are decorated with interesting wall paintings and carved figures. The
church at the bottom, Beta Medhane Alem, the House of the Savior of the World,
is considered by many to be the largest rock hewn structure in the world. Well,
we're obviously not in ancient Africa right now, but the point is here: the
powerful geometric forms, platforms, artificial mountains, alignments to the
cardinal points and celestial events still influence a number of contemporary
architects in their design thinking, as we see here in these three examples. On
the left, you may recognize this building, it's on the Florida campus, designed
by Florida architect, William Morgan, the Museum of Natural History, very much
influenced by the Maya pyramids, his study of that. The upper right is Abraham
Zabludovsky, the National Auditorium of Mexico City, also very interested in
both the Maya and Aztec civilizations and how they created buildings on
platforms. In the lower right, Antoine Predock's Spencer Theater for the
Performing Arts in Alto, New Mexico. Again, he was very interested in the
indigenous cultures of the southwest. Here we have two examples by a
collaboration between Peter Rich, a South African architect, and structural
engineer John Ochsendorf from MIT. They're experimenting with long forgotten
techniques of constructed vaulted spaces with thin masonry shelves, work that
overturns the outdated notion that architecture from the past is conceptually
and technologically primitive.

We're talking about the birth of the Renaissance today and trying to answer the
question, why did it emerge out of Florence? Few cities in pre-industrial
Europe expanded as rapidly as Florence in the 13th century. It was at this time
that Florence joined the upper ranks of Europe's great cities. Before a new set
of walls went up Florence was smaller than Pisa, and probably not much larger
than other towns in Tuscany and central Italy, as you can see by this map, at
this time, about the 14th century. A century later however, Dante and Giotto,
two of the great figures of the Renaissance, grew up in a city that had a
population conservatively estimated at 90,000, a four to sixfold increase. Here
they are: the statue of Giotto on the left, a painting of Dante. In a lifetime,
Florence became the largest area of any city built in Europe. By the way, there
is a great painting by Michelino, from 1465, of Dante reading from "The Divine
Comedy." It's a detail showing him standing before the city of Florence.
Ironically, the decimation of Europe by the Black Death left the remaining
population with greater supplies of food and work opportunities, and an
increasing demand for trade and goods. Although the power of the church had
been damaged during this time, the new orders of Mendicant Friars that
dedicated themselves to public assistance such as the Franciscans, Carmelites,
Servites, Augustinians and Dominicans, integrated themselves and their
monasteries into the daily life of the city. Likewise, the rising merchant
class began to form strategic alliances with these groups, particularly the
Papacy in Rome, in order to secure and advance their social, economic and
religious positions within the community. For example, Enrico Scrovegni of
Padua, the ambitious son of the rich Reginaldo, whom Dante Alighieri had
consigned to hell as a usurer in his Divine Comedy, was planning to build a
palace and a private chapel. You can see here one of the great frescos that he
commissioned Giotto to complete. The image of Florence we have today as great
civic, religious, and private urban buildings surrounded by public space was
just beginning to emerge in the 13th and 14th centuries. Except for churches,
the city building fabric was very dense and generally chaotic, owing to the
rapid pace of development and as yet an undeveloped notion of the city as an
aesthetic enterprise. Families of old magnates and rising merchants, kept to
the towers clustered around their homes where they took refuge from the
violence of the street. The cityscape bristles with these towers, so
characteristic of all Italian towns; we can still clearly see those in cities
such as San Gimigiano and Bologna. After this period there were increasing
periods of relatively stabilized political order abroad and the lightening of
wartime tax burdens, as profits flowed into the city from international
commerce and financial operations and became available for consumptive
spending. This spending was symbolic of the Florentines optimism about the
future, and nowhere is this more evident than in support for the fine arts and
construction. Renaissance advances in the arts began in the 14th century but it
was not until the 15th century, the Quattrocento, as it's known in historical
terms, that the great architectural projects we associate with the
Renaissance began to emerge. The two frescos that we've been looking at here,
by the way, are by Ambrogio Lorenzetti, produced in 1340 in the Palazzo
Pubblico of Sienna, is one of the great masterworks of Early Renaissance
secular painting. We see today the monumentality of these building projects is
more apparent than any broader ideals of urban planning that may have inspired
communal policy. Yet there was some degree of rationality in the way the
commune organized public space. You can kind of see the pattern of that on this
map. During the urban explosion in the later 13th century, open spaces were
preserved and even enlarged such as Santa Croce at Santa Maria Novella. Efforts
were made to ensure order by establishing regularized street patterns in new
areas, for example around Santo Spirito. Building legislations covering not
only health and safety but visual aspects of height restrictions, street widths
and paving were introduced. Oh, by the way, you can see the core of the
original Roman settlement right there in the center with its very strict,
tightly constructed grid. The churches and their orders embarked on a
significant building program supported by increasingly powerful merchant class
families such as the Pazzi, Albizzi, Peruzzi, and the Medici. Along with the
church and the various guilds, these families served as patrons of the arts,
kind of as a display of wealth, power, education and civic consciousness.
Patrons sought out and supported private chapels. All of Brunelleschi's church,
for instance, met this criterion. In Santo Spirito as we see here, for
instance, the nave and presbytery were enclosed by a ring of 35 chapels
belonging to local families. Much new church construction was financed by the
selling of these private chapels. The city attracted at one point, virtually
every major artist, writer, scholar and architect of the period; Giotto,
Uccello, Donatello, Manetti, di Cambio, Verrocchio, Michelangelo, Leonardo da
Vinci, Brunelleschi and Alberti, that's only a few. This image of the
Renaissance Man adapted from Vitruvius on the upper left by Leonardo,
personifies the Renaissance fascination with proportion, reason, and the
ancient wisdom of the ancients reinvented in contemporary terms. And perhaps we
could do, as Giulio Carlo Argan suggests, boil this down to the invention of
perspective and the discovery of antiquity. For this talk, we want to
concentrate on two architects, Brunelleschi and Leon Battista Alberti, who
pursued both paths in the design, construction and analysis of architecture,
very different paths, actually. These architects represent two interrelated but
distinctly different approaches to the art of building. Brunelleschi, seen on
the left here, was the son of a stone mason, trained as a goldsmith. He was a
self-taught architect, originally coming from metal work and stone background,
of course. Brunelleschi's early achievements included his formulation of the
laws of linear perspective presented in two painted demonstration panels, no
texts attached. He made long trips to Rome where he extensively documented
Roman building form and construction techniques. Alberti, seen here on the
right, his family was expelled from Florence under the rule of the Albizzi
family, but he received the finest education then available. In addition to
classical studies in Greek and Latin, he was an accomplished musician, athlete,
artist and scholar. He received a doctorate in canon law in 1428, and then
later he took the Holy Orders for the priesthood. Alberti also served as a
papal inspector of monuments of Rome and he advised Pope Nicholas V in
restoration of the papal palace and the Roman aqueduct. Brunelleschi went about
taking up the problem of representing three dimensions accurately on paper. And
his friend, Masaccio, demonstrated his understanding of the formal perspective
in his fresco, "Trinity with the Virgin, Saint John the Evangelist, and Two
Donors" in 1427 in Santa Maria Novella designed by Brunelleschi, which you see
on the right there. On the left is a modern analytical plan and section, that
kind of reverse engineers what the space might look like if it were actually
constructed. What we call today here, we're looking at the Ospedale degli
Innoccentim, this would be an orphanage, the literal translation is the
Hospital of the Innocence, but it's essentially an orphanage, was commissioned
by the Silk Guild of Florence, one of the wealthiest in the city. The various
guilds, who were major patrons of the arts, were particularly fond of building
hospitals, such that there were 35 by the end of the 15th century. Brunelleschi
screens the hospital behind an arcade extending an existing one on San
Annunziata, a building, a church to the left, but employing classical design
principles to achieve an exceptionally well proportioned system with delicate
details worthy of its function. Notice how the street to the left there is
accommodated in the arcade design. Later designers built on Brunelleschi's work
by adding additional arcaded buildings and they enclosed the Piazza into an
outdoor room. You can clearly see this in the Google Earth map. The image, by
the way, the red arrow shows where the elevation shot of the Ospedale was taken
from the previous slide. The construction of Santa Croce was begun by Arnolfo
di Cambio and paid for by some of the city's wealthiest families. The
building's austere design reflects its Franciscan principles.
Brunelleschicontinues it though in the Renaissance manner with the
planning of the cloister, chapter house, and Pazzi family chapel we can see on
the right. As our textbook says, I think rather eloquently, "The small,
brilliant structure represented a high point in early Renaissance style; it's
cerebral, rational, and serene. It was a marked contrast to the dynamics of
Gothic architecture." Incidentally, an illustrious group of Italians are buried
here including Michelangelo, Galileo, Machiavelli, Gentile, Rossini, and
Marconi, from the 20th century. Brunelleschi and Michelangelo worked on
different aspects of this fine Renaissance building, the Plan of the San
Lorenzo complex. The church of San Lorenzo is part of a larger monastic complex
that includes chapels and the great Laurentian Library we'll look at later by
Michelangelo. The major spaces were organized around a square cloister that
corresponds to the modular regularity of Brunelleschi's church plan. You'll see
that in all of his buildings. The crossing here is continued, the whole idea,
excuse me, the whole idea of the geometry of this building is continued into
the third dimensions, which we can see in the crossing, and we're directly
beneath it looking upwards towards the dome. At the end of the day, the Duomo
of Florence, the Santa Mariadel Fiore is the project that really defines
Brunelleschi's career in the public imagination. The body of the Florence
Cathedral was designed by Arnolfo di Cambio and Francesco Talenti, but it was
left without its dome, which was completed by Brunelleschi in the 15th century.
The campanile, or bell tower, we saw earlier was begun by the painter Giotto in
the 14th century. Brunelleschi defeats his old rival, Ghiberti, and wins a
major competition for the seemingly insolvable problem of spanning this
crossing without wooden centering, which actually, some people say would have
used every tree in Italy. His knowledge of Roman vaults, such as those found in
the Pantheon really pays off here. The octagonal pointed form of the dome owes
some allegiance to Gothic arches, but technically it's much different. The
secret is a series of integrated shells connected by stone, wood, and iron
rings that are gradually built up in dimensioning radii with each successive
ring supporting the scaffold to build the next. You can see the axonometric
cutaway on the right showing some of that detail. Brunelleschi designed from
intuition based on intelligence and years of experience supported by empirical
tests in full scale and partial scale models. You see a very detailed model on
the right of the lantern that would be put on top of that dome. The models
built for the project were also used simultaneously to explain new construction
techniques to the guild building committees that had to pay for the
construction, and the crews of the master craftsmen and their teams, so they
could understand construction techniques that few people had ever seen. The
decorative covers of the ring connections at the arch spring, that's right
where those very large openings and you see the construction tent there,
they're being repaired, it's exposed for maintenance. Brunelleschi looks on for
his niche near the Duomo, and you can see those little pieces of stone and wood
that are connecting, those are the connecting rods that go into that first
ring. Interestingly, the facades of major churches, including the Santa Maria,
were often left unfinished as funding went elsewhere, the great dome, the
interiors, the chapels, etc. To the left, we see a 19th century view of the
Duomo, and San Lorenzo on the right, with a facade design by Michelangelo, just
to the top. Let's move on to Alberti, a very different figure in this era.
Alberti built few structures, but the intellectual and physical craft exhibited
in his works establishes him as one of the most influential of all Renaissance
architects. His writing on the art of painting and architecture: "The Ten Books
on Architecture," was the first treatise, first real serious treatise on the
subject, published since Vitruvius. It's loosely based on that book. It had a
profound impact on design thinking which still continues to this day. Here we
see the Palazzo Rucellai, Alberti's palazzo proposal owes more to ancient
models than say, Michelozzo's Medici Palace, for example. Superimposed orders
like that of the Coliseum articulate to three floors. The diamond shapes of the
base of the first floor mimic Roman opus reticulatum masonry that we've seen in
earlier slides. Notice his understanding of historical time as he deconstructs
the corner of the building, that slide to the left there as it connects to that
white structure, which is actually an earlier building, suggesting the earlier
building came first. So, he's very conscience of these kinds of adaptations to
existing conditions. Here we see the Santa Maria Novella by Alberti, his facade
composition in particular we're looking at. It dates here about 1456 to 1470,
and it became a prototype much interpreted by other Renaissance designers. Its
two-story central bays are capped by a pediment temple-form. Notice how he
conceals the gabled roof form here with the basilican cross-section, with these
flanking volutes that mark the shed roofs over the aisles. Compare this to a
building we looked at in the Gothic era, the San Miniato al Monte, which you
can actually see from this church, the two churches you can see one another if
you're actually sitting there in Florence. They're actually quite wonderful,
but look at some of the differences here and notice that San Miniato al Monte
does not have the kind of formal control over the elements as they're put
together. Take for example, the pediment on the top is broken, pulled apart,
and there's a series of arches inserted, and when you see Alberti's on the
right, it has more classical derivations. Well, we'll stop here with this
quintessential Renaissance diagram of proportions from Santa Maria Novella.
It's a good place to end, at least at the beginning of the next couple of
lectures on the Renaissance to really look at the emphasis and obsession that
Renaissance architects have with measurement, proportion, and mathematical
systems expressed in construction.


Today's topic is the perfection of the High Renaissance in Rome, using
Tempietto and St. Peters as our principle examples. Most scholars seem to agree
that Bramante revived and, in part, transformed the round peripteral temple of
antiquity, and then guided by the logic of geometry, made it more precise.
Despite its small size, this work has come to epitomize the Renaissance
architects' search for geometrically perfect form. It also contains the germ of
Bramante's grandiose plans for the rebuilding of St. Peters. The Tempietto was
commissioned shortly before 1502 by the Catholic monarchs Ferdinand and
Isabella of Spain. The Tempietto was built alongside the recently renovated
Church of San Pietro in Montorio to commemorate the martyrdom of Saint Peter,
an event believed to have taken place on Janiculum Hill. Thus, it was conceived
as a martyrium, a memorial type rarely erected after the Early Christian era,
even though the form was much admired in the Renaissance. To be sure,
concentric forms were greatly admired by Renaissance theorists, but they were
rarely constructed. More frequently the concentric design was utilized for the
ground plans of fortresses and fortified cities; however, the choice in these
cases was more determined by military than aesthetic theory. So the closest
approximation to Bramante's spatial design, because of its circular peristyle
and the famous island villas that is the Maritime Theater at Hadrian's Villa in
Tivoli. Bramante certainly knew it because Vasari, the art historian of the
time, tells us that he measured what was at Tivoli and Hadrian's Villa, and he
utilized them. This design was never executed, leaving the structure rather
isolated in a claustrophobic space in the current plan. So, the circular temple
in the front is all that we'll see. Like many architects of the period,
Bramante believed that good modern work was based on good ancient work, and the
Tempietto can be connected to numerous antecedents. Kimball and Wittkower, for
instance, have pointed out that Alberti gave great impetus to the theoretical
preference for the isolated, raised, round church with a dome resting on a
drum. Certainly the proportional harmony, monumentality and the gravity of the
Tempietto are Albertian, but it should be noted that Alberti did not even
mention the round peripteral type in his chapter on temples. Many forms from
antiquity, the tholos and the tumulus that we've looked at before, particularly
the Temple of the Vestal Virgins, and the Oracle at Delphi were well-known to
architects. Francesco di Giorgio even proposed a circular temple within a
circular courtyard in an earlier treatise. But it is Bramante who refined the
proportions of its component parts and enhanced the concentrics character of
the ground plan, and in this way brought greater integrity to the architectural
form. Here is a contemporary analysis of the elevation of the Tempietto that
demonstrates a fascination with proportional relations related to the Golden
Section. Let's remember that this is a martyrium, or a memorial. I don't
believe there are any sacred relics buried here, but we can see the underground
vault with a small oculus in the floor of the cella above. Notice how the
delicate balustrade atop the entablature from which the dome rises really
creates a sense of lightness here. Here are the steps that lead down into the
vault below, you can see that, and it kind of mirrors... the symmetrical below
is above. A view of the decoration in the metopes, very Greco-Roman, somehow
these devices are nearly ecclesiastical in nature. And notice how the triglyphs
don't line up with the centers of the column below or the balustrade elements
above. Geometric perfection may be achievable on paper but very difficult to
create in built form. Bramante's extensions of the geometric exercises into the
floor, and square and circle motifs, are seen here from a photograph of the
interior. Here's a view looking up into the dome from standing directly over
the oculus in the floor with a view to the vault below, up into the remarkably
symmetrical design of the dome. A symbol of the Holy Ghost occupies the center
of the composition, and it completes the vertical axis that aligns with the
oculus below. Now let's go on to St. Peters, one of the most recognized icons
of the Renaissance. We're looking here at the dome that's designed by
Michelangelo and completed by della Porta and Fontana in 1590. Like many of the
great building projects of the Renaissance, St. Peters was built with the
contributions of many of the best artists and architects of the era. The
original basilica was built upon the tomb of St. Peter under Constantine the
Great. By the 15th century it was obvious that old St. Peters, then almost
1,000 years old, was in really bad shape. Notice in the drawing at the right
those grey lines show the original location of the Circus of Nero. It gives you
a relationship to the ancient city of Rome. The original plan was to repair the
church only as necessary. Nicholas V, the Pope at the time, began some
foundations for a new choir, but after his death the work languished until
renewed by Julius II in 1503. Julius still maintained this attitude but it
became clear by this time that simply keeping the church was unfeasible. We
know that for Bramante's generation, the mathematical and precision of the
central plan held a theological symbolism and it reflected the perfection of
God. Many architects drew plans for centrally planned buildings. Here are two,
one by Sangallo and the other by da Vinci. Remember too, that the basilica form
was adapted from the Romans, and Bramante and Julius were rethinking the form
of the Christian church, considering it as a central plan. Although it's not
clear when Bramante was chosen as the principle architect, he proposed an
entirely centrally planned church very much in the manner of the Tempietto, a
martyrium on an enormous scale. The processional-based churches which evolved
from the basilica form were very different. Bramante's plan is extraordinarily
delicate, almost lacelike in composition. The apse and the tomb of the old
basilica were intended to be right at the intersection of the cross between the
principle dome. Here you can see the exploration of this idea in this design
sketch by Bramante. The darker outline is the old basilica. Here repetitive
Greek cross modules are beginning to take shape in this design drawing. A
system of measuring lines can be seen running through the drawing to determine
alignments. Here is an idea for extending the plan by adding a Nave, you can
see that at the bottom, which likely admits pressure from his Vatican clients
who were not completely sold on the idea of the central church plan for a
liturgically-based church. Very little design or documentation or actual
construction was left after Bramante's death beyond the basic plan and the
foundations for the main piers. Interest in the Latin Cross form reemerges
prompting studies like this one by Rafael, one of Bramante's pupils, who
succeeded him on the project. The Sack of Rome in 1527 interrupted the work and
it was picked up a year later by Antonio da Sangallo the Younger. Sangallo
enlarged the foundations as they were determined to be inadequate and made
plans to include a nave. After Sangallo's death, Michelangelo Buonarroti
becomes the capomaestro, or the building master, and despite personal animosity
between him and Bramante, he seeks to return to Bramante's plan with his
systematically reduced diagram. That's Michelangelo's on the right there.
There's a small portico added that gives the church a specific line of entry,
whereas with Bramante's you can enter equally from either side. The idea of
this nave is later projected by Carlo Maderno and ultimately contributes to the
Baroque facade that we know facing the Piazza of St. Peters. The piazza and its
kind of embracing colonnade emerged in the Baroque era, and it was designed by
Gian Lorenzo Bernini. We'll look at this in a couple of lectures from now. Now
the problem of how to place a dome over this plan returns. From earlier
sketches and documents we know that a more hemispherical form was favored in
the Renaissance, and that's clearly what Bramante had in mind given the formal
success of the Tempietto. However, a dome of this form barely appears from the
mass of this surrounding structure of St. Peters. An ovoid form begins to
emerge and we can see in the debate clearly developing in this drawing by
Michelangelo. You can see the ovoid form and the hemispherical form, it's
simultaneously at this drawing. The impressive space created by Brunelleschi in
Santa Maria della Fiore is hard to top, and we can definitely see its influence
in this form and structure of the Dome of St. Peters with some noticeable
differences. The rib system has been expanded to 16, and resting on 16 pairs of
paired Corinthian columns supporting a segmented entablature. Likewise, the
double shell that you can see here in this section allows the inner form of the
dome to approach a sphere with the exterior, the ovoid shape springs from the
mass of the building and clearly announces the center from the outside. The
experience of the dome on the inside achieves an almost nearly perfect form.

Besides the church, the palazzi, or palaces of the ruling families, were the
principle civic buildings in the Renaissance cities. Architects and their
clients skillfully employed new ideas of order and style to create landmark
buildings and gardens within the city fabric and in the countryside, and that
created a visible display of power and social hierarchy. In this talk, we'll
concentrate on the urban influences of the palazzi and the gardens in Florence,
using as principle examples the Uffizi galleries, the Pitti Palace, the Boboli
Gardens, and the Vasari Corridor that connects them. The Renaissance examples
are not isolated from the existing city fabric, so let's start with an older,
great example, the medieval public space, the Piazza della Signoria, which is
dominated by the Palazzo Vecchio seen here in a painting from 1498. By the way,
this painting also depicts one of the many public spectacles occurring in these
spaces. In this case, a rather grisly one, the radical priest, Savonarola, and
his colleagues being burned at the stake. According to Marvin Trachtenberg,
both the Palazzo Vecchio and the Piazza della Signoria are not ad hoc
constructions, but they were shaped with high inventiveness and sophistication
of purpose and meaning in them. The majestic town hall, you see there on the
right, anchors the vast, roofless space of the piazza. Unlike any other
Florentine square, the enormous void of the Piazza della Signoria was itself a
monument, a telling symbol of the power and sovereignty of the community. This
aerial of Florence locates the Piazza della Signoria, key buildings and public
spaces which constitute a kind of physical fabric that defines the character of
Florence. The specific elements in this fabric that we are discussing today
include: a town square, Piazza della Signoria; the city hall, The Palazzo
Vecchio; an office building, Palazzo degli Uffizi; a bridge, The Ponte Vecchio;
a covered walkway, which is Vasari's Corridor; a church, Santa Felicita; a
residence, The Pitti Palace; and a garden, the Boboli Gardens. Michael Dennis
likens this ensemble to a kind of "mega building" that comprises a series of
discrete structures connected by Vasari's Corridor. Each building has its own
identity and internal logic, but simultaneously it's a fragment of a larger
urban organization; thus each is both complete and incomplete. And though a
given building may be a type, it is always a deformed, never a pure type, never
a pure object nor a pure texture, it has characteristics of both; an ambiguous
building that was, and still is, multifunctional. All of this contributes to a
rich and magical world where spaces are like buildings, buildings become
bridges, distant objects form an integral part of the composition. The Uffizi,
seen in the upper right-hand plan, was designed as an office complex to unite,
under the central control of Cosimo I, all the public offices, guilds,
archives, court artists, etc., and when begun by Vasari in 1559, work had
already progressed for four years in the construction of a street which
connected the Piazza della Signoria with the Arno, which you can see down there
near the bridges. Vasari then proposed a double loggia to line the space of the
street and incorporate the foundations and remains of demolished houses where
possible. The Church of San Piero Scheraggio, near the Palazzo Vecchio, the
Mint, behind the Loggia dei Lanzi, were also absorbed in the new fabric. You
can see how the loggia organizes all these disparate elements. Thus from the
very beginning the building had an urban and social role that controlled, even
sponsored the specifics of the functional programs and the incorporation of
remnants of the past. It changed the organization with a prehistory or memory,
as well as the characteristics for future change and development. On the left
is a view into the Uffizi corridor space towards the Arno River at the end. The
right slide shows how Vasari pays homage to the Palazzo Vecchio by framing the
tower in a perspective view. A cluster of statues, the most important of which
is David by Michelangelo, form the juncture between the Piazza and the Uffizi.
The interior courtyard is unified by a colonnade or loggia at the lower level,
and a continuous fenestration that gradually becomes more transparent and
lighter on the upper story. It's a deceptively simple project, and a very
effective public space. Vasari takes the idea of the palazzo courtyard, opens
it at one end of the piazza and completes the other with a triumphal arch that
makes a cross between a courtyard, a piazza, and a street. This is the view
from across the Arno River looking at the triumphal arch piece completed in
1580 by Buontalenti. It's great, his name means good talent or great talent.
Now this red line outlines the corridor that Vasari built in 1584, and only
five months at the time of the wedding between Francesco I de' Medici, and
Giovanna of Austria; and it served to link up the Pitti Palace, where the Grand
Duke resided, and the Uffizi, or the offices where he worked. A second corridor
above the Via della Ninna links the east side of the palace with the Uffizi
that Palazzo Vecchio, and that's right up at the top. It's a seat, of course,
of the Florentine government since the 13th century. The Vasari Corridor is a
covered walk, almost a kilometer in length, an overhead passageway that starts
out from the west corridor of the gallery, heads towards the Arno, and then
raises up by huge arches, and follows the river as far as the Ponte Vecchio,
that you can see here. It crosses at passing on top of the shops. The meat
market on the bridge was at this time transferred elsewhere, so as not to
offend the Grand Duke's sensitive nose on his walk, and it was replaced by
goldsmiths who continue to work there today. On the south side of the Arno, the
corridor passes around a tower; they couldn't get the Manelli family to move
it, through the interior of the Church of Santa Felicita, along the tops of
houses and the gardens, until finally it reaches the Boboli Gardens and the
apartments in the Pitti Palace. Vasari thus created a monumental urban
"footpath" that visually conveys the absolute power of the ruler from the
city's edge to the historic center. Now we've arrived at the palace. Notice how
the form of the palace constructs the shape of the Piazza, creates that space
as a figure. Kind of like the idea we were talking about with the main Piazza.
The Pitti Palace has always been considered one of the most significant
examples of domestic architecture in Florence. Any modern visitor is impressed
by the monumental facade dominating the Piazza dei Pitti, or by the courtyard
and gardens behind it. Records of official visits studied by scholars suggest
that Pitti's great size was ultimately due to diplomatic protocol, namely the
consistent and constant entertainment of housing and visitors to the Medicean
court. The original Palazzo or Pitti Palace dates from 1458, it was
commissioned by Luca Pitti, a Florentine banker. The palace was bought by the
Medici family in 1549 and it became the chief residence of the ruling family of
the Grand Duchy of Tuscany. The Pitti grew as a great treasure house and later
generations amassed paintings, plates, jewelry, and luxury possessions. It
ultimately becomes a museum. We see the palace as it appeared in 1599 in this
lunette by Giusto Utens. It's one of 17 paintings he made of Medicean Villas
and palaces. Located behind the Belvedere Hill at the edge of Florence, the
Palazzo Pitti was gradually transformed from a free-standing suburban block in
the early Renaissance to a double-sided urban wall that it is today. Originally
a residence with a private garden, it now contains five separate museums, and
the Boboli is a public garden. The front of the building defines these sides of
the Piazza Pitti. It's flat, austere, and tough. In contrast, the garden side
picturesquely builds up to the central block containing Ammannati's
romantically robust courtyard. These two spaces, the piazza and the courtyard,
align with the main axis of the Boboli, thereby connecting city and garden with
the Palazzo Pitti as a mediator in plan and section. We can see the influences
in this design from other palazzi in the city such as the Palazzo Medici
designed by Michelozzo di Bartolomeo for Cosimo de Medici. Its size and
grandeur even rivaled that of the more public Palazzo della Signoria. Vasari
described the Palazzo Medici as the first to be built in the modern manner. By
modern he means more about its modern conveniences, rational layout and sheer
size than its external appearance. The design is more conservative than
innovative. Its form is not dissimilar to its Tuscan ancestors. It's cubic,
stony, and impenetrable. Even the heavy cornice, you see at the top is not
unusual as it recalls overhanging roofs common to Florentine houses. However,
the style and magnitude of the cornice is unprecedented in secular architecture
after Imperial Rome. It reflects Michelozzo's affinity for powerful weighty
forms of antique sculpture. The rusticated stone you see in the lower story
recalls ancient wall construction and was considered appropriate for a client
who had been compared to a celebrated Roman and praised by humanists "as if he
had been born into Athens or Rome." The Palazzo Strozzi also follows this style
of construction but unlike the Palazzo Medici, where the stone work becomes
more refined with each successive story, the entire building is designed with a
rusticated ashlar pattern. The Boboli Gardens, which were in the back of the
Pitti Palace, as we see here in this aerial, were laid out for Eleonora di
Toledo, the wife of Cosimo I de' Medici. The first stage was scarcely begun by
Niccolo Tribolo before he died in 1550, and then was continued by Bartolomeo
Ammanati, with contributions in planning from Giorgio Vasari, who laid out the
grottos. In this aerial photograph, we see Ammanati's earlier Renaissance
layouts directly behind the palace, very self-contained, with later extensions
to the lower left that are becoming Baroque in design. On a still larger scale,
the garden itself can be seen as a mediator between the urban world of the city
and the natural landscape outside of the walls. As a metaphor of the city, the
Boboli is a dense green texture, analogous to the medieval fabric of Florence,
out of which are carved streets, squares, and theaters. These urban references
are then embellished with arcades, statuary, and fountains, as well as
grottoes, mazes, and demonic suggestions of a darker world. The primary
connection of the Pitti, however, is made through the main axis of the garden
by an amphitheater in the form of a partial Roman circus that you can see here.
Thus, the Palazzo Pitti might be interpreted as a gigantic double proscenium
serving as a natural theater on one side and the urban theater on the other.
Or, alternatively, is the building the theater within the city, with the garden
as its stages? From the upper terraces of the gardens, just below the
Belvedere, we get a view of the city of Florence which becomes part of the
garden landscape, an idea depicted perfectly in this 19th century painting by
Jean-Baptiste-Camille Corot. While created mostly for the private enjoyment of
elite patrons, garden designers experimented with environmental and spatial
devices that prefigured urban design strategies we'll see in the Baroque city
plans.

Andrea Palladio's legacy is an extensive body of built work, and an influential
treatise called "The Four Books of Architecture" which is arguably the most
important architectural treatise of the Renaissance, and one of the most
influential books in the history of Western architecture. His work was widely
disseminated through publication of this treatise, and his work and
architecture by other architects such as Inigo Jones in England and Thomas
Jefferson in the United States, sort of promoted those ideals. His work is
concentrated in the City of Vicenza in the Veneto region. UNESCO inscribed this
body of work on the World Heritage List in 1994. Born Andrea di Pietro della
Gondola in Padua to a miller, by the age of 16 he was already inscribed at
Vicenza in the guild of bricklayers and stone-masons. For the next ten years he
figures in documents in which he engaged in sculptural work. The humanist,
poet, dramatist, diplomat, and grammarian, Gian Giorgio Trissino, at that time
engaged in the building of his Villa Cricoli near Vicenza, discovered the gifts
of this young man who worked there as a mason. Trissino afforded him, after the
fashion of humanist circles, the classical name "Palladio," whose association
with the image of Pallas indicates what he expected from the young artist.
Trissino was not only responsible for Palladio's change in profession, but also
had a formative influence on his conception of architecture. Palladio traveled
to Rome and studied the ancient ruins which he extensively documented. In fact,
he produced a folio of them, which became the gold standard of guidebooks well
into the 18th century. Palladio's first great success as an architect was a
commission to support the medieval Palazzo della Ragione of Vicenza with a
surrounding structure. Now this was in danger of collapse but they didn't have
the money to restore the whole project, and so his screen, which we'll call
this building, is in fact, an uninterrupted sequence in two stories of the
celebrated so-called Palladian motif, an arch supported by a double set of
Tuscan columns, which allows the whole structural system to be very porous and
lightweight in appearance. In his treatise, Palladio idealizes this design in
elevation and in plan, but in actual practice the building's even more
sophisticated. The as-built plan below shows the many irregularities of the
existing building, nothing really aligns here, and that core he had to contend
with in wrapping it with a very precise Renaissance screening system, that
requires precise alignments. The experience of the building is one of complete
harmony in all elements from all sides. Only careful observation reveals the
cleverly hidden angles and lack of exact alignments with the earlier building.
As the ideal type of centralized building, Palladio's Villa Capra, or Villa
Capra Rotunda, has perhaps more than any other house imposed itself on the
imagination. It's mathematical, abstract, foursquare in plan, without a really
apparent function, and totally memorable. Its derivatives have enjoyed
universal distribution; and when he writes of it, Palladio is lyrical. He says,
"This site is as pleasant and delightful as can be found, because it is on a
small hill of very easy access, watered on one side by a navigable river; on
the other side it is encompassed about the most pleasant rising which look like
a great theatre and all are cultivated around with most excellent fruits and
exquisite vines; and therefore it enjoys from every part most beautiful views,
some of which are limited, some are more extended, others which terminate with
horizon, so there are loggias made in all four fronts." Facades of ancient
domestic buildings were unknown, but with the application of the temple front
to the house Palladio believed that he had re-created them in form and spirit.
Documentation of Roman country housing is rare so this claim is a little
speculative. However, Palladio was the first architect to consistently graft
this temple front onto the front of a country house giving it its really
distinct monumental appearance. The enormous dissemination of this type in the
wake of his work has made us blind to this rather interesting invention. Here's
a plan and the elevation of the Villa Trissino, in Meledo, begun in 1567 by
Palladio. While it was never completed, this villa design anticipated the
sprawling Neo-Palladian compositions of early 18th century England. The
quarter-circle hyphens became a popular motif in 18th century America, as well.
Being on the edge of Vicenza near a river, the Palazzo Chiericati is
simultaneously a palazzo and a suburban villa. Although originally the building
was intended to be part of an urban plan that created the Piazza in front of it
along with other buildings rather than the isolated icon we see today. Palladio
raises the palace up on a podium, whose central section displays a stairwell
clearly adapted from an ancient temple. Even though superimposed loggias, as we
see here, are present in other buildings in the Veneto, the use to which
Palladio puts them on the facade of the Palazzo Chiericati is absolutely
unheralded in terms of its power and expressive quality. It's also one of the
first occasions from which the loggia flank is enclosed by a wall section
containing an arch: a solution that's adapted from the Portico di Ottavia in
Rome, which will thereafter become a usual practice in his villas. Il
Redentore, the masterpiece of ecclesiastical architecture by Andrea Palladio,
was commissioned by the Venetian Senate in 1576 through 1592. Fulfillment of a
vow made on the deliverance of the city from the devastating plague of 1575
through 1576, the Doge and the Senators promised to visit the church annually,
in perpetuity. In their annual pilgrimage dignitaries proceeded across a
temporary causeway over the Giudecca Canal, which you see in front on the third
Sunday of July, giving rise to the Festa del Redentore, a major Venetian
festival. The small bays corresponding to the aisles at each side of the
slightly projecting central nave are clearly defined; they're bound together on
the outside and inside. The rhythm of the small order interpenetrates the
temple front not seen in the framing of the... seen in the framing of the
central door, and the suggestion of a continuous entablature right across the
whole facade links these two systems. However, the calculated interlocking of
two different temple fronts you can see here makes the "reading" of such a
facade no easy matter. This is a definitely a Mannerist conception, but in
contrast to Michelangelo, Palladio's mannerism is academic; it is hardly ever
concerned with detailed forms, capitals, tricks of that nature; tabernacles and
entablatures retain their classical significance, shape and ratio. It's the
interplay of large classical features which, in this case, accounts for the
Mannerist character of the whole. The church of San Giorgio Maggiore is the
frontispiece for the former Benedictine San Giorgio Monastery which occupies
its own island in the lagoon of Venice. Here we see another exploration of the
problem in relating two different scales of the nave and the aisles using
superimposed temple forms. Here's a plan showing the much wider side aisles
that Palladio needed to accommodate in this structure. They follow one and the
same pattern, a colossal temple front is placed before the nave and a smaller
order carrying a part of the pediment before each of the aisles. This
arrangement looks like an interpenetration of two temple fronts, a small and
broad one, which has been intersected by a high and monumental one; all of
them, of course, projected onto a wall. Palladio's death in 1580 left several
notable projects either in construction or in planning stages, and they were
inherited by Vicentine architect Vincenzo Scamozzi, you see here on the right,
elegantly dressed, holding a Corinthian capital, the most famous being the
Villa Capra, we've just seen, and the Teatro Olimpico. It is a tribute to
Scamozzi's skill that these two projects are considered among Palladio's most
successful executed works. Scamozzi's influence spread far beyond his Italian
commissions through his treatise, "The Idea of Universal Architecture" that
became as popular in the day as Palladios "Four Books." It would be the last of
the Renaissance works on the theory of architecture. In the upper left is a
Palladio-inspired villa, La Rocca Pisana. Teatro Olimpico was only six
months into construction when Palladio died. Scamozzi was called upon to
complete the project, and his best known and most original contribution to this
design was the elaborate stage set with its remarkable Trompe-l'oeil street
views, you can see here on the large image. He not only designed the sets, but
also put considerable effort, which was rare at that time, into designing the
lighting that permitted the make-believe houses of the stage scenery to be seen
lit from within, creating the illusion they were real streets. Inigo Jones is
regarded as the first British architect to bring Italianate Renaissance
architecture to England. We do know that he visited Italy as early as 1601, and
later in 1613 to 1614. He purchased copies of Palladio's "Four Books" and
extensively annotated them with notes and drawings. He also knew Scamozzi well,
having discussed architectural matters with him, and heard his opinions on
Palladio. No other English architect had as much direct knowledge of Italian
design. We can see that influence in the Queen's house at Greenwich and this
Banqueting Hall from 1619. Inigo Jones almost overnight brings English
architecture into the so-called "modern period." Unlike France, Germany, and
Italy, where we can follow the evolution of architectural styles during this
period, England essentially leaped from the medieval age into the neoclassical
era. Palladian influence finds its way to America in the 18th century, notably
with this fine example of Palladian architecture outside of Charleston, S.C.,
which is called Drayton Hall. The double projecting portico is reminiscent of
Villa Cornaro, designed by Palladio in 1551. The floor plan of Drayton Hall is
Palladian as well, probably after Plate 38, rather specifically from James
Gibbs' "Book of Architecture," an influential pattern book published in London
in 1728. And perhaps the most famous example of Palladian influence in this
country that we're aware of are those by Thomas Jefferson. The University of
Virginia, in the upper left and Jefferson's own home of Monticello on the
right, and we should also add the design for the White House by James Hoban.
The White House was later modified by Jefferson and Benjamin Latrobe, often
known as the "Father of American Architecture".
