Modules 6,7 & 8

In this lecture, we'll look at the evolution of church architecture from the
early years of Christianity in the late Roman Empire to the Byzantine era.
We'll briefly survey how the simple basilica structures are superseded by
taller and larger dome structures, and how, accordingly, the atmosphere of
interior spaces evolved in time during this period. To understand the
evolution of church architecture in its beginnings, it is important to look
at two sources: the social component and the architectural precedent. The
early Christian populations, under the rule of late Roman Empire, had to meet
in private houses as the religion wasn't officially sanctioned until the
Edict of Milan in 313, through which the emperor Constantine declared
tolerance for all religions. So one source that gives us the beginnings of
church as an architectural type is the religious social narrative and the
program of religious gatherings that started in private houses before being
housed in specific religious buildings. These early meetings developed a
spatial narrative that interpreted the social aspects of serving the religion
into a spatio-temporal setting. The second source for the church architecture
came from the architectural tradition itself, from a specific building type,
which took place as the reinterpretation of the Roman basilica, which was a
circular building type for religious use. It is important here to understand
that the architectural type, a specific spatial organization developed in
time for certain uses, was selected because of the requirements of the social
activities that were translated into spatial settings in the early
underground meetings in private houses. These early meetings emphasized
gatherings of masses through a processional itinerary. That is why the Roman
basilica fit more to the needs of early Christians than the religious
buildings of the Roman Empire, which were iconic temples built for deities
without the active social use of prayers or religious gatherings. With
relatively minor modifications, the Roman basilica form was adapted to
Christian ritual. The altar was placed in the apse, where the magistrate's
seat had formerly been, entrances were set in the opposite short wall, and an
atrium set in front of the entrances accommodated gatherings before services
and enabled the unbaptized to hear but not participate in the mass. The
longitudinal arrangement of the atrium, nave and aisles, and apse formed this
social and spatial narrative axis for the procession that terminated at the
altar. Here's another view, called isometric projection, where the section
and the plan are juxtaposed to create a three-dimensional diagram. You can
see the arrangement of nave, aisles, and the corresponding three-dimensional
structure. As you can see, the sectional organization of the roof system
cascades according to the hierarchy of the main and secondary spaces. The
height difference between the nave roof and the aisle roofs are utilized for
clerestory windows, which receive light to the tall nave space from above. A
very clear example of the early church organization is the church of Sant'
Apollinare Nuovo at Ravenna in Italy, constructed around 500 as the palace
church. The rather plain brick exterior is in stark contrast to the golden
mosaic interior. The church is constructed of brick with single aisles
flanking the nave, as you can see on this plan, and the nave terminates with
a semi-circular apse that becomes the focus of the interior. Aside from the
plan organization that developed through the requirements of gatherings and
processional ritual, the contrast between the exterior and interior in terms
of ornamentation and decoration also tells how the interiorized spirituality
of the religious beliefs are translated into architectural symbolism. The
day-to-day life, the practical world, is nothing but a passing flux, thus the
modest, plain exterior. The richness of the life lies in the teachings of the
Bible as one devotes herself to God, to the eternal life beyond this world.
So the church, as the house of God, signifies the kingdom of God in all its
richness in its interior decorations and light plays. Also, the graphical
representations on the interior surfaces served for the teaching of the Bible
to the uninitiated by depicting its stories in figurative form, in the lack
of textual publications. As you see, the walls above the nave arcade are
finished with mosaics depicting processions of female saints and male martyrs
advancing toward the altar. Between the clerestory windows are single figures
representing Old Testament prophets and New Testament evangelists and
apostles. In the highest section of the nave wall there are scenes
representing the passion story and the miracles of Christ. Another good
example of the early churches is Sant' Apollinare in Classe, Ravenna, Italy.
Similar to Sant' Apollinare Nuovo, it is a sober exterior which emphasizes
the volumetric clarity of the basilica by lowering the narthex porch. The
church has a wider nave compared to Sant' Apollinare Nuovo, which is again
flanked by single aisles on each side. Also, the interior is again much more
detailed and refined as to its decorative and symbolic aspects. The frosted
windows provide a soft light that adds to the spirituality of the interior
with its mosaic work and marbled columns. Also, the apse is much more
prominent compared to Nuovo, with its large semi-dome and large windows. In
this image, we also see the wooden truss structure of the roof. As we looked
at the Roman basilica structure, the nave was spanned by using trusses. While
we see in the early churches like Sant' Apollinare Nuovo and Classe, the
truss emphasizing the longitudinal arrangement of the basilica space with the
nave and the aisles, towards the later periods we start to see dome as the
main symbolic and structural architectural element taking the place of the
truss system. The dome, as an architectural element pulling the interior
space upwards, had always been associated with the heavenly sphere. While its
symbolism for divine realm was suitable for the church symbolism as the house
of God, church as the place where earth and heavens meet, dome also had more
potential as a structural element that enabled large spans through its unique
distribution of gravitational forces. Dome was highly used by the Romans. One
of the famous examples is the Pantheon, as you would remember. With the Roman
precedence at hand for symbolic and instructional reasons, we see the rise of
domed structures in the evolution of Christian architecture, where the
longitudinal arrangement of the basilica structure was married with the idea
of dome and enabled larger naves covered by a series of domes. We see this
meeting of two architectural elements, the basilica plan and dome roof, most
clearly expressed in Hagia Sophia, or Ayasofya in native Turkish, which was
built around 533 in Constantinople, which is the present Istanbul in Turkey.
Hagia Sophia is probably one of the highest achievements of Christian
architecture with its clear span of almost 250 feet which is achieved by the
use of a central dome supported by two main half-domes on the longitudinal
axis. The very complex structure consists of a series of dome and half-domes
transferring the gravitational forces in a cascading manner to the four very
large buttressing piers. The main space of the nave is also surrounded by a
two-level gallery. This amazing complex structure designed by the architects
and mathematicians, Anthemius and Isidorus, translates into one of the most
impressive interiors in the history of architecture. The unique light
condition is achieved through multiple levels of windows. Particularly, the
windows set between the dome's ribs create the illusion that the dome floats
unsupported, rivaling the Pantheon. While Anthemius and Isidorus were
inspired and challenged by the Pantheon, later generation architects, like
the Great Sinan of 16th century Ottoman Empire, would look at example of
Hagia Sophia for his mosque designs. Again, this is the Pantheon, and the
other image is Shehzade Mosque by Sinan. It is also important to understand
that while churches were the main religious structures, there were other
building types in the early Christian architecture, with more centralized
plan organizations that celebrate a person or an event with religious
significance. Among these centralized structures were martyria, baptisteries,
and mausolea. Martyria were constructed as memorials to commemorate saints or
sites of special importance, whereas baptisteries were spatial buildings for
baptism, mostly centrally planned around the baptismal pool. Mausolea were
erected to house the tombs of important people. This is the mausoleum of
Constantine's daughter in Rome, built around 350. The circular plan, similar
to Pantheon's, has a layered organization where the central space is
surrounded by an ambulatory, a colonnaded space which is similar to the aisle
in the basilica plan. Its cross-section is very similar to that of a
basilica. Instead of being extended in the longitudinal, this time we have a
rotation of the main space and adjacent aisles. The entry is marked by a
rectilinear narthex. Again, the interior is highly charged with the symbolic
and experiential use of light from the clerestory windows. You can also see
in this image the arcade of double columns and the tomb, the sarcophagus,
centrally placed under the main dome. This is the Baptistry of the Orthodox
in Ravenna, Italy. The structure is a domed octagonal volume surrounding the
octagonal marble font. The central scene in the ceiling mosaic depicts
Christ's baptism in the river Jordan encircled by twelve apostles, and an
outer ring illustrating altars in semicircular niches and empty thrones. The
centrally planned structures of martyria, baptisteries, and mausolea also
inspired the later developed centrally planned churches. These centrally
planned churches had a domed main space creating ethereal interiors with
particular light conditions. An important example of such centrally planned
churches is San Vitale in Ravenna, built around 540. The octagonal dome of
the church is echoed by the octagonal galleries and aisles, and the interior
space is much more fluid than that seen in the early San Costanza mausoleum
in Rome. The clerestory windows illuminate the nave directly, and between the
piers of the octagon the semicircular niches carve into aisles and galleries
to borrow additional light from the exterior walls. The proportions of the
exterior are equally fine, as the red tile roofs directly express the
volumetry of the interior space. As we briefly surveyed, church architectures
started with simple basilica structures with wooden truss roofs and evolved
into larger structures with domed, tall spaces which resulted in unique light
qualities. This evolution will continue with even larger structures of Gothic
and Baroque periods, where we will continue to see light, again as a main
theme, in the making of interior spaces to achieve the ethereal and
transcendent qualities of the heavenly sphere in church architecture.

In this lecture, we'll look at the evolution of Islamic architecture in time
and its original variations. We'll briefly survey the mosque type and their
characteristic structural and spatial qualities, along with the idea of
Islamic ornamentation. The building type most closely associated with Islam
is the mosque, the primary place of worship, which evolved from several
sources. Again, as with the Christianity and churches, the social aspects of
the religious ritual required specific spatial arrangements. In Islam,
worshippers arrange in tightly packed ranks and files, placing themselves as
close as possible to the prayer wall. This explains the square or wide
rectangular shapes of the prayer halls, as opposed to the long, narrow plans
or the centrally planned Christian churches. As the prayer is directional,
oriented toward Mecca, the mosques also always face Mecca. The social ritual
of gathering and praying communally in large crowds required expansive prayer
halls, and architecturally, the prophet Mohammed's house with its large
courtyard provided the first precedent for such a gathering. Also, with the
need for covered prayer halls, the structural system of Christian churches
served as a precedent, but this time rather than the basilica scheme with the
larger nave and aisles, the layout was a series of aisles extended according
to the need. As you can see in this slide, the Great Mosque at Cordoba, the
idea of an open courtyard is kept, and a covered prayer hall is added to the
general scheme. The courtyard houses a domed fountain pavilion for the ritual
of cleansing before the prayer and also serves for social interaction, as
this is an important part of Muslim day-to-day life. Another significant
element of mosque architecture is the minaret, a slender towering element
which enables a caller to summon the Muslims to prayer. While, for its
practical service one minaret is sufficient, this element also took on a
symbolic presence and multiplied in numbers, sometimes holding all the four
corners of the mosque, as we see in this slide, which is the Great Mosque in
Damascus. Again, the main elements are the open courtyard with its specific
ritual and social functions, and the covered prayer hall. As the mosque
architecture spread all around the world, there are certain variations
emerged from the common base principle of an expansive covered prayer hall
with an open courtyard. Most characteristic mosque types are, first, the
columnar or hypostyle mosques in Arabia, North Africa, and Spain; second, the
Iwan mosques in Iran and central Asia; and finally, the centrally planned
domed mosques largely found in present Turkey and around Europe as
reminiscent of the Ottoman Empire. The Great Mosque in Cordoba is an example
of the hypostyle mosque type. The main prayer hall is spanned by a matrix of
columns that are connected by superimposed arches with their unique shapes.
This layered system of arches results in a light and delicate structural
system and elevates the experience of the interior space to a heavenly realm
beyond this world. In Cordoba, we also see that some portions of the
homogeneously distributed structural systems start to receive special
treatment, like these intricately vaulted dome spaces where the structure
meets with a specific function like the mihrab, which is an ornamented niche
on the main wall facing Mecca, indicating the direction of Mecca, or the
maqsura which is the particular centrally located bay reserved for the caliph
or the sultan, the religious or the state leader. It is also important to
mention here that the ornamentation in mosques is highly abstract and
geometric compared to the figurative decorations in churches. Islam doesn't
favor literal representation, thus one cannot find depiction of stories of
religious teachings on the surfaces of mosques, unlike the example of
churches; rather, the ornamentation is suggestive of a divine order in a
multiplicity of scales, which is usually expressed in highly repetitive,
symmetrical patterning of relief surfaces that embody multiple scales of
elements from larger shapes to smaller details, all in harmony under the
governance of a geometrical algorithm. The Friday Mosque in Isfahan is an
example of the Iwan mosque type. While its basic scheme is a rectangular
multi-columned hall with a large courtyard in the middle, we see the addition
of larger volumes on the four sides of the inner courtyard. These larger
volumes, which are walled on three sides and open on the other, are called
iwans. And usually an iwan is also taller than the adjacent structure with a
vault or dome above it. This is Masjid-e Shah, again in Isfahan, and it shows
the typical courtyard and four iwan scheme. Both in the Friday Mosque and the
Masjid, we see that along with the iwans deviating from the regular
structural bay, there are other domed spaces emphasizing space, like the
mihrab and maksurah. Iwan, as an architectural element, functions as
transition from larger open spaces to smaller interior spaces. Also, as it is
larger and taller than the adjacent structure, it has a volumetric presence
both on the horizontal and the vertical. This unique volumetry required
intricate scalar transitions in ornamentation. As you can see, the treatment
of curved wall surfaces with concave elements has an overall effect of
dissolving the material presence of the wall into smaller surface units that
seem to hover in space. This treatment also exemplifies, again, the general
approach to ornamentation in Islamic structures, which can be explained as
the unity of multiple scales under a geometrical rule as the symbolization of
a divine order regulating multiple facets and scales of life and universe.
Another prevalent type of mosque form is the multi-domed mosques which were
mainly built by the Ottoman Empire in Anatolia, present Turkey, and around
Europe. Its most prominent examples are in and around Istanbul, the
Constantinople of the Byzantine Empire, which were built after the city's
capture by the Ottomans in 1453. While multi-domed mosques were also built
before the 16th century, the ones built by the architect Great Sinan, the
Ottoman architect, are deemed today as the most significant examples. This is
the Sehzade Mosque in Istanbul, built by Sinan around 1550. As you can see
from the plan and section, it's a centrally planned multi-domed structure
with an arcaded courtyard in front. The main dome is supported by four large
piers in the vertical, and the lateral forces are balanced by four half-domes
buttressing the main dome. It is important here to understand that the
centrally planned Byzantine churches served Sinan as a model to work with.
Compared with Hagia Sophia, we immediately see the similar technique of
employing a complex system of domes in cascading structure, emphasizing a
central main hall. The successive layering of domes and semi-domes combined
with an intelligent use of piers enabled Sinan to have a larger series of
openings on the wall surfaces, and this resulted in a unique light condition,
again, transcending the day-to-day experience through a glimpse of God's
heavenly sphere. Another prominent example by Sinan is the Selimiye Mosque in
Edirne, a city close to Istanbul in present Turkey. Selimiye was built around
1570 and its main space rivals Hagia Sophia. While the dome is similar in
size to that of Hagia Sophia, Sinan's technique in Selimiye eliminates the
half-domes on the sides and the result is a much more unified main space than
Hagia Sophia. The main dome on Selimiye sits directly on eight piers, and the
arches that connect these piers carry the dome. As daring as is the dome, one
must also appreciate the four very slender minarets of exceptional height.
The minarets are 232 feet and they are grooved to accentuate their
verticality. The resulting effect on the overall volumetry of the mosque is
an exceptional contribution to the scalar hierarchy of the exterior mass,
which is very finely tuned with the hierarchy of cascading elements,
carefully controlled in proportion and rhythm. It is also important to see
that while mosques were the center of religion they also served other
functions in society with the addition of other space around them. As you can
see from the plan of Selimiye, the mosque had two madrasahs (a higher
education institute) on the corners and a marketplace on one side of the
courtyard. These complexes, where the mosque is surrounded by other functions
like madrasah, primary school, marketplace, hospital, community kitchen,
caravanserai (which is lodging for travelers), and cemetery, are called
kulliye. One of the largest and architecturally significant kulliyes is
Sinan's Suleymaniye Kulliye in Istanbul, with the magnificent Suleymaniye
mosque in the center. As you can see on the plan, the mosque, which is
similar to Hagia Sophia's structure of a main dome flanked by two half-domes,
is surrounded by a series of multi-column structures that house many
different public functions, like school, hospital, lodging, kitchen. As you
can see, each of these units have their own courtyards, and the scheme
results in a carefully delineated hierarchy of public and private use, from
the larger Muslim community to the particular users of the public
institutions. In addition to the mosque form, Islamic architecture around the
world also created some of the most significant structures in the form of
dedicated tombs or palaces. One of the world's probably most famous
buildings, the Taj Mahal in India, is an example of Islamic dome tombs. Taj
Mahal was built around 1640 for Shah Jahan's wife, Mumtaz Mahal, by three
architects who were assisted by a number of craftsmen from Persia, central
Asia, and India. The tomb's structure sits in a larger landscape of carefully
patterned gardens alluding to the gardens of paradise, and its sheer size is
very well balanced with the elegant massing and refined detail and
ornamentation, which results in a sublime serenity. Another spectacular
example of Islamic architecture is the Alhambra Palace in Granada, Spain,
which is a large compound of halls and gardens in a citadel on top of a
ridge. Spaces of particular significance from the Alhambra Palace are, first,
the Courtyard of Arrayanes, which provided the entry to the Hall of
Ambassadors. As you can see, the courtyard houses a very elegant water
element, which plays with the surrounding columns in its reflections. The
scale of the courtyard is very well controlled with the careful proportioning
of its size to the adjacent vertical surfaces. Secondly, the Hall of the
Ambassadors is an excellent example of Islamic interior decoration. The
ceiling consists of thousands of small wooden pieces suspended from the roof
structure to transform the ceiling surface into a layered volume representing
the layers of heaven, and a small dome representing the heavenly throne is at
the center of this magnificent surface play, which makes the ceiling surface
the ethereal heaven with its throne in the middle. Another significant space
from Alhambra is the Hall of Sisters, with its unique vault pattern. Again,
what we see is an obsessive exploration of the three-dimensional patterning
that translates between different scales in the search for a representation
of the divine order underlying the workings of life and universe. The
resulting relief of the three-dimensional surface is volumetrically
underlined with the unique play of light, which again bears a heavenly
symbolism. As we have seen in this lecture, it is difficult to characterize
Islamic architecture in singular types, because its built environment carried
regional influences and changed according to certain localities. However,
some common aspects can still be traced in terms of the conception of the
mosque space, which has always been non-directional in its spiritualistic
aspects as the prayer required a homogeneous distribution of masses or a
centralized or columned space without the procession we see in Christian
architecture. Minarets or towering structures on the corners of the mosques,
from the very start, took on a symbolic presence and became the signature
silhouette of Islamic environments. And finally, despite the differences in
structural and spatial organizations and even the building types, all Islamic
architecture carries an abstract approach to ornamentation, which resulted in
highly repetitive geometrical patterns signifying a cosmological unity in the
name of God, rather than representing the teachings of religion in
representational decorations, as we see in church architecture.

Today we're talking about Early Medieval and Romanesque architecture. We're
going to concentrate on the Romanesque, because here, even though this was
called the Dark Ages, we see the kind of rediscovery of the power of
architecture, particularly in stone masonry. This is a great example here in
the slide from Durham Cathedral, which is in England. So, let's talk about
what happens after the fall of Rome. Really, the great Sack of Rome occurred
on August 24, 410, which was led by Alaric I, the leader of the Visigoths.
The Roman capital had already been moved to the Italian city of Ravenna. This
was after the Visigoths had entered Italy. St. Jerome, a citizen of Rome at
that time, wrote that "the City that had conquered the whole world was itself
conquered." Contrary to the stereotypical image we see here of the barbarians
versus culture, Peter Heather, in "The Fall of the Roman Empire: A New
History..." tells us that because the barbarians had already converted to the
Christian sect of Arianism, it was not a particularly violent looting. There
was a little ravaging and damage to buildings, but it had a profound effect
on the city. Many of the city's great buildings were sort of entered into,
including the mausoleums of Augustus and Hadrian, and many Roman Emperors of
the past were buried; the ashes of the urns were scattered about. This was
the first time the city had been sacked in 800 years. The citizens were
devastated. Tens of thousands fled the economically ruined city into the
countryside, many of them seeking refuge in Africa. For a long time, that
sort of center of culture disburses. Let's see what happened to architecture
in this sense in which the rediscovery of the way to build apart from the
cities takes on a Roman character. Romanesque essentially means in the Roman
manner. This flight and migration from large urban centers into the
countryside continued through the next century and created a scattered
collection of smaller, relatively self-sufficient settlements often fortified
and organized around a church. Now look at some of the characteristics here
you can see in these slides. These are northern Italy; thick heavy walls;
block-like appearance, earthbound kind of structure, large simple masses,
squares and circles kind of intersecting with each other. Notice how the
interior spaces are essentially projected out into the volumes. The interior
seems to be a contrast of light and shadow. Notice in the lower right-hand
image, there's a growing sophistication of how spaces are vaulted or covered.
It's kind of interesting to look at the detail of the capital that we've
looked at before. There's kind of a faint memory of the classics here. The
ideals of order and geometry and repeated metaphor that were embedded into
the classical orders gradually dissipate over time, and are supplanted by
very interesting narrative carvings that present allegories that can be
"read" by the illiterate, such as these capitals here on the ills of lust,
despair, greed, and scandal mongering. This is from the Benedictine Abbey of
Sainte-Marie-Madeleine at Vezelay. As we see throughout this course, the
architectural ideas presented in one historical era may often reemerge,
sometimes centuries later and seen through a different conceptual lens, such
as in this Romanesque revival masterpiece, the Trinity Church, by H. H.
Richardson, which was built in Boston in 1872. Richardson, a giant of a man,
is fully into this role, if you can see in the upper left-hand corner; he's
dressed as a medieval monk carrying a large manuscript. Now with Charles the
Great, or Charlemagne, as we know him, he helped restore connections between
the Papacy of Rome and spread the influence of the Christian church in what
became the Frankish Empire. As we have come to expect, great rulers project
their vision of the world into a building program which in this case, revives
ideas of stone construction that were inherited from the Roman Empire. In
this plan of Charlemagne's Palace, which is at Aachen between 792 and 814,
(it's the 16-sided building in the upper left) the Palatine Chapel, which is
connected by a passageway to a basilican audience hall at the lower end of
the plan. Notice the chapel was preceded by a forecourt or atrium. From a
loggia on the second level of the chapel, Charlemagne could address an
audience assembled there. The Carolingian building has been modified by the
addition of a Gothic choir (you can see that in the upper left, it has a grey
outline around it) with a higher roof over the dome. Only the lower wall
sections of the central part are authentic to the time of Charlemagne. The
San Vitale at Ravenna served as a model for this building. The Chapel also
contains original features, most notably the use of polychrome arches.
Columns at the second level were imported from the Palace of the Exarchs in
Ravenna. It's kind of interesting, you can see this kind of collage of
columns from all over the empire being used or reused in various buildings.
The second level was used by Charlemagne and his court. You could observe the
services without interfering with those celebrating holy offices. The Plan of
Saint Gall that we see here is the earliest preserved and most extraordinary
visualization of a building complex produced in the Middle Ages. Ever since
the plan was discovered, sometime between the 819 and 826 A.D., a few years
after Charlemagne's Death, it has been preserved in the Monastic Library at
Saint Gall. Indeed, its presence there was singled out by UNESCO. It was the
single reason that the library and a repository of over 2,000 antique and
medieval manuscripts was designated as a World Heritage site in 1983.
Indicative of the attitude towards non-religious works, late in the 12th
century an unknown monk at the monastery took this map, folded it up, reduced
its size so it was manageable, and wrote a text on the life of St. Martin
across it, and folded it up back in the collection, which is probably the
only reason that it survives today. So, we're going to study this for just a
minute, the Plan of Saint Gall. The Plan of Saint Gall dates from
approximately 817, and the drawing sets forth the major elements of a
Benedictine monastery in the drawing. It established a planning model that
would be used for the next 400 years or more as the basis for monastic
design. Another prime example of how religious ideals are made concrete in a
document; that's kind of a fundamental aspect of this course. The rigorously
organized religious communal life of the monastery is seen clearly in this
kind of grid-like organization of the plan. Benedict formalized the idea of
the monastery with monks living as an "order" with communal rules in a
mutually dependent community. The monasteries ranged from simple assemblies
to more powerful ones like Saint Gall where the Abbey functioned like a
monarch. The monasteries were a refuge of knowledge and learning which
eventually evolves into the scholastic tradition of the Gothic era. Two
reconstructions are shown on the left there by Walter Horn, 1965, and Allan
Sorrell. You can see a three dimensional visualization of what they think the
plan might have looked like. This image of Mont Saint-Michel in Normandy
shows many layers of construction beyond its Romanesque beginnings, but
clearly demonstrates this kind of insular self-sufficient quality of medieval
communities. And here we see it literally; it's an extension, or an art. It
was on a mound, it was in the middle of the water, and it essentially
constructs a religious mountain that's occupied by many people doing many
different tasks. And here in the plan, again, I mention these are an
accumulation of constructions over a period of time, but you can see the sort
of way in which all of the activities that support the Church surround it and
relate to it. Let's look at another religious community which is Saint Martin
du Canigou. It's a former Benedictine monastery in the Pyrenees of southern
France, which still today is very difficult to access. You can imagine back
in the 1000s what it would have been like. Many churches, such as Sainte-Foy,
St. Sernin, and Saint Martin du Canigou, functioned as reliquaries for sacred
objects such as the skull, or skulls of Christ, the raiment's of a saint's
robe, the splinters of the true cross and so on, and often the spoils of the
Crusades that came back with them evolved into religious communities which
increasingly attracted itinerant pilgrims. Now we come to Vezelay, which is a
medieval town in central Burgundy, which, from the end of the first
millennium contained important relics purported to be the bones of Mary
Magdalene. When this was confirmed by Pope Alexander II in 1068, it lead to a
dramatic increase of pilgrims to this site. We'll end here, or start here,
for the next lecture where the focus is on towns and churches on the major
pilgrimage routes, particularly that of Santiago de Compostela.

As Europe moved into the 11th century, there's much more happening in terms
of construction than the rise and triumph of the Romanesque Church. Inns,
hospices, rural enclaves, roads, bridges, castles, all these have their place
in the reemergence of civil society after Charlemagne's reign. All of them
should be seen as part of a new fabric that was experienced by everyone from
knights, to the traveling court of kings, to the thousands of poor pilgrims
who made their way along the multitude of religious routes began to connect
hundreds of shrines, sacred spaces, towns and churches throughout the entire
fabric of Europe. The most famous of these routes was called el Camino de
Santiago de Compostela, the road to Santiago, or St. James in English. It's a
network of routes that connect holy places with the final destination, which
is the cathedral of Santiago de Compostela, in present day Spain near Vigo.
At the Santiago de Compostela, the cathedral is reported to house the remains
of St. James or Santiago. Santiago de Compostela was the supreme goal for
countless thousands of pious pilgrims who converged here from all over Europe
throughout the Middle Ages. To reach Spain, most pilgrims had to pass through
France, and they would have visited many towns along the way, which became
rich from gifts and religious tourism. The resulting cultural and economic
trade that emerged was an important factor in rejuvenating urban centers and
opening up the countryside to increased accessibility and productivity.
Pilgrimage churches such as Ste. Foy, in Conques France, from about 1050 to
1120, emerged as one of the smaller pilgrimage stops, but it contains a
superb example of a Romanesque Church constructed on the foundations of an
earlier structure. The community began as a settlement that was started by a
hermit, and eventually it evolved into a Benedictine monastery. The church,
which is built of local limestone, dominates the community (which you can see
here) and grew organically without a master plan. The town itself has few
alterations past the 18th century, making it an excellently preserved example
of a medieval town plan. The public space in the town is quite compact. It
leaves little space for congregation of large groups. At the high point of
the pilgrimage, a monk by the name of Bernard d'Angers, wrote about the
experience in 1010. And he essentially said, &nbsp"&nbspthe crowd of people
prostrating themselves on the ground was so dense it was impossible to kneel
down. When they saw it for the first time (meaning the church) all in gold
and sparkling with precious stones and looking like a human face, the
majority of the peasants thought the statue was really looking at them and
answering their prayers with her eyes." Views of the church gradually unfold
as one moves through the winding streets of the town. I think you can get a
good idea of that here. One of the most impressive elements of the church are
the tympanum carvings of the Last Judgment, which are particularly renowned
for their allegorical inventiveness, composition, and fine craftsmanship. The
interior spaces and dome over the crossing are of impressive scale, although
the dome collapsed and was later rebuilt. The gilded and jewel-encrusted
reliquary at the left represents Sainte Foy, a young girl martyred by the
Romans, which was the principle attraction for pilgrims in the Medieval era
of this location. There are some reports that monks actually stole it from
another location, but we won't linger on that. Increasing numbers of
religious pilgrims to sacred sites posed a dilemma for monasteries and church
leaders. The high influx of visitors jump-started the economy, but they also
proved disruptive to the quiet, contemplative life in the monastery. The
architectural solution was in a plan organization that accommodated streams
of visitors and daily worship cycles of the monks, simultaneously. These four
examples give you a good idea of the pattern of this new typology of the
pilgrimage church. The nave and transept apse plan is there from earlier
examples, but notice how the aisles become a standard feature, not an add-on,
as well as an ambulatory that goes behind the altar along with numerous side
chapels to accommodate prayers, offerings, and confessions. Now let's look at
a monastery, and this is a great example, this is a Reconstruction view of
the monastery of Cluny III, seen from the east. This was the largest church
in western Christendom at the time of its construction. It's a suitable
monument to the influential order that was headquartered here. To the left,
beyond the apse, stretch buildings of the infirmary the abbot's palace, and
many others you can see. In the years from 1082 to 1096, Abbot Hugh embarked
on an effort to increase the international scope of money contributions by
expanding the abbey's connection with the pilgrimage to Santiago, hence the
effort put into the cathedral and monastery.   This was the third abbey
church at Cluny. It was designed on a plan whose essential features are those
of the mass-audience churches on the pilgrimage roads to Santiago,
particularly a reference to Saint-Martin at Tours, and Saint-Sernin at
Toulouse. This plan of the monastery of Cluny III shows the remains of an
atrium at the east end of the church of Cluny II. They survive to the right
of the church. They're sort of in grey. The cloister was enlarged after the
great church was completed by demolishing the nave of Cluny II. Most of this
monastery was destroyed after the French Revolution, unfortunately. The Abbot
Hugh designed it on a plan whose essential features are those of the
mass-audience church that we saw earlier. Essentially, this is a great weigh
station to accommodate many thousands of pilgrims. Now like these other
churches, St. Martin and St. Sernin, Cluny III had four aisles and an
ambulatory around the main apse, with five radiating chapels (you can see
here in this model and the plan), two secondary apses on the either arm of
each one of the two transepts, and a two-tower facade. The internal
dimensions of the church were an impressive 425 feet long by 125 feet wide,
and about 125 feet at the choir. In England, at roughly the same time, Norman
rulers and their architects and builders were redefining the form of the
stone masonry church, of which the finest example is the St. Cuthbert
Cathedral at Durham. The treasures of St. Cuthbert Cathedral include relics
of St. Cuthbert, the head of St. Oswald of Northumbria, and the remains of a
great medieval scholar named the Venerable Bede, who was known as the Father
of English History by some. The order of the plan favors very simple
rectilinear alignments, rounded arches and bundled columns. The church, like
many other Norman examples, is not engaged in a complex of buildings like the
French Romanesque churches that were associated with monasteries. Dimensions
are impressive here: 469 feet long; interior width, about 81 feet; and
height, roughly 73 feet at the crossing. The pointed ribbed vaulting, among
the first to appear, achieves a higher apex at the end, you can see that
towards the apse, and allows the clerestory to expand in height and width
letting greater amounts of light in to illuminate the ceiling plane. An
effect of this is to make it appear lighter and start floating above the body
of the church. Churches such as San Miniato al Monte, on a hill overlooking
Florence, built around 1062 to 1090 remain rather true to the early Christian
basilica plans. The front facade attempts reconciliation of two Roman
building forms in an effort to resolve the width of the aisles with the
height of the nave. While there's clearly not the depth of space created by
carving or pocheing thick masonry walls we see in the other Romanesque
churches in France, an attention to the adornment of surface using
polychrome, decorated rafters, paintings, and byzantine mosaics in the apse,
creates a magical effect for such a simple form. The reliance on simple plans
and building forms with elaborated surfaces is seen clearly in the cathedral
complex at Pisa. All three elements of the complex are detached and
free-standing, which allows the entire building to be admired as an object.
The amount of space devoted to the complex is quite unique for this period of
time. The Cathedral here clearly relies on the basilica plan, you can see
that on the left, but is more elaborate in the application of delicate
ornamentation of the exterior. The Campanile, we know as the leaning tower,
is remarkable in its ability to achieve lightness through the stacked
colonnades circling the shaft of the tower. While the Campanile gets all the
worldwide attention, the Baptistry may be the most remarkable of the three
pieces. The interior is a simple cylindrical volume which at 180 feet high,
and 116 feet in diameter, makes it the largest Baptistery in Italy. The
interior is entirely free from columns, and the double vault which is quite
unique, gives the illusion of a space far larger and lighter than it appears
from the exterior. The play with space and light, as well as the shift in
decoration to pointed registers over the openings, is a distinct transition
to Gothic architecture.
