Mesopotamia: Part 1

  Today's topic is on the civilizations of ancient Mesopotamia. We have two
lectures on that subject. First, we'll introduce the concept of the urban
revolution. For thousands of years southern Mesopotamia, ancient Iraq, was home
to hunters, fishers, and farmers, exploiting fertile soil, rivers, and abundant
animals. As population increased and techniques in agriculture became more
sophisticated, proto-urban settlements emerged that developed into the great
fortified cities of Mesopotamia within that area. You've probably heard of the
term "Fertile Crescent," the so-called "birth place of western civilization,"
the Bronze Age civilizations including Sumer, Akkadian, Babylonian, and
Assyrian empires developed here around the Tigris-Euphrates Valley all the way
into Phoenicia, and then down into the Jordan River. Let's talk about the Urban
Revolution; and it's defined by the archaeologist, Gordon Childe. He coined
this phrase to describe the process by which small, kin-based, nonliterate
agricultural villages were transformed into large, socially complex urban
societies. Some of the earliest written records on earth were found here which
describe the design intentions of these great civilizations. Take a look at
this diagram on a clay tablet that was found in the city of Nippur. It
demonstrates the construction of canals through that city. The growth of cities
is synonymous with the rise of civilization in general, but the term "urban"
should not be understood as a value judgment. For instance, Kostof says "to
hold that civilized life cannot occur outside of cities belittles the genuine
achievement of non-urban, rural and nomadic cultures." In fact these cities
evolved in a complex interaction with non-urban groups. Also, emerging from
these complex social hierarchies are the great kings. These cities were led by
heroic rulers that expressed their power through urban planning and
architecture. An example, "The Epic of Gilgamesh," is one of the first written
stories in the western language. An excerpt describes the city of Uruk. Here we
see a picture of Gilgamesh, a statue from that era. "Go up on the wall of Uruk
and walk around, examine its foundation, inspect its brickwork thoroughly. Is
not, even the core of the brick structure made of kiln-fired brick, and did not
the Seven Sages themselves lay out this place?" Let's look at the cities that
we'll examine in these two lectures. It's within this region that people began
to build planned communities that eventually emerge as the great city states of
Mesopotamia. The cities underlined in red are the ones that we'll discuss.
Let's look at a very early civilization, or settlement, which is Catalhoyuk,
which is in the area of Anatolia, and it appears as early as 7500 B.C.E. The
complex is what we'll call a precursor to the Tigris-Euphrates communities that
become more complex. It's in Anatolia in modern Turkey, an area that has been
home to many civilizations such as the Hittites, the Phrygians, the
Achaemenids, Greek, Armenian, Roman, Byzantine, and Ottoman states. Catalhoyuk
was composed of primarily domestic buildings. The site has no obvious public
buildings or social hierarchy, but some public spaces between the buildings, as
you can see here, the open spaces, are beginning to appear. There's no
protective wall. Entry to the dwellings was restricted to the interior and had
to be accessed from the roof by ladders. This again is the location of
Catalhoyuk in the upper left-hand corner. Construction was wood frames filled
with mud and covered with plaster, as seen in this reconstruction on the left.
Spaces of worship have also been identified, which were adorned with elaborate
murals, artifacts. People lived in the presence of the dead. You can see
burials actually occurred within the walls of the settlement. In 3200 B.C.E.,
this was the largest settlement in that particular area. This is a map of Uruk.
Uruk was surrounded by a massive wall, which according to tradition was built
on the orders of King Gilgamesh, an actual King of Uruk, who became the hero of
many later stories and epics. Surrounding the ziggurat is the white temple
dedicated to the God Anu. You see that ziggurat in the upper right-hand corner.
It was dominated by monumental mud brick, or adobe, in this hemisphere,
buildings that were decorated with mosaics of painted clay cones embedded in
the walls, and extraordinary works of art. Large scale sculpture in the round
and relief carving appeared for the first time, together with metal casting
using the lost-wax process. Now we're looking at the City of Ur, and Ur is
something that kind of means an original. So, we kind of think about Ur as one
of the principle, largest scaled communities of this era. The ruins of the city
state of UR contain one of the finest examples of the ziggurat. You can see it
in the upper left-hand plan of the temple complex of the city. Notice how the
city is surrounded by domestic and other public buildings. The population at
the time of this reconstruction image was purported to be the largest city in
the world, estimated upwards of 65,000 people. That includes not only the
walled area, but also all of the lands that are around it. We have to kind of
remember that because what remains on the ruins are only the monuments of the
ziggurat. You can see clearly the town was quite extensive. The ritual function
of the ziggurat is clearly seen in this perspective diagram. Ziggurats are
essentially a symbolic mountain&nbspwhich rises out of the earth, and sometimes
the literal flood waters from that inundated the surrounding fields. We see in
this naming of ziggurats from various texts, perhaps an atavistism by early
Sumerians to recreate an image of sacred sites from their former homelands in
the mountains. This Sumerian poem sums it up: "House of the Mountain, Mountain
of the Storm, Bond between Heaven and Earth." Notice the battered walls, or
those walls which lean in at the top. This helped resist the weight of the
earth and gave the ziggurat a mountain-like profile. The buttress and panel
decoration treatment on these walls derived from the mud and reed construction
of houses. Another important principle is illustrated here. A detail, which
begins in a culture as purely functional, may remain in the culture as purely
decorative, and you see that case here. There's the overall plan again, the
ziggurat and its layout and its ritual layout. Let's look at some of the craft
that we see in these constructions. In the foreground, we have the mud brick
construction. This is a reconstruction that's currently going on in southern
Iraq. Also, you can see the very sophisticated gold work in the upper
right-hand corner, which demonstrates a significant understanding of smelting
and craft work. In the lower right-hand side, you see votives of worship
figures that demonstrate hieratic size. The bigger, more important, and the
staring eyes display devotion and respect for deities and rulers who act as
intermediaries of the gods. The level of skilled craftsmanship in precious
metals, shown by this headdress, again, from Queen Puabi, and I think the date
is about 2550 B.C.E., is absolutely exceptional.

Mesopotamia Part 2
  In this talk, we'll look at more detail at several later cities built in
Mesopotamia from about 720 B.C.E. to 520 B.C.E. You'll notice early settlement
and building patterns, but note the scale of the cities has grown reflecting
burgeoning population, increasing trade, and constant state of warfare between
cities vying for an expanded territory. Again, we'll look back at this map, and
it shows the city of Khorsabad up in the top, and we'll end at Persepolis down
in the lower right-hand side at Persia. The Plan of Babylon probably epitomizes
Mesopotamian cities more than any other. Its origin date goes back to
approximately 3000 B.C.E., but we know it best from works accomplished by
Hammurabi in the mid-18th century B.C.E., and Nebuchadnezzar II in the 7th
century B.C.E. The latter was responsible for major civic works such as The
Hanging Gardens, ceremonial entries that earned major status in cities of the
ancient world. By some estimates, Babylon was the first known city to have over
200,000 people. You might want to compare that to the size of Gainesville
today. The Hanging Gardens mention a few things about some of these. These
images here you see in the upper right hand-side are kind of legendary, but at
a certain moment, you see on the left the tablets of Hammurabi that speak
about, among other things, building codes by which the cities... (indiscernible
-1:29) And you see a modern image of Babylon, which still exists in ruin, from
Google Earth on the lower right hand side. The Ishtar Gate within the city was
part of an entire complex of ritual pathways that went through the entire
fabric. It was surrounded by walls organized around processional routes leading
from the entry gates in the fortified walls towards ceremonial spaces, state
and religious structures. As we said, the most renowned of these entryways was
the Ishtar Gate. The scale is a little exaggerated in this reconstruction image
here on the left. To the right you see kind of... in the lower right-hand
corner, that's from the reconstructed piece in the Berlin Museum, and so you
can see the scale of figures relative to that process. This was used and
designed to communicate the power of the state through ritual and procession.
You'll notice the Great Ziggurat of Babylon in the upper right-hand corner. The
other illustrations are from the Berlin Museum where a portion of the gates was
actually removed from the excavation site in the 19th century and reconstructed
there within the museum. The use of glazed brick indicates a sophisticated
system of ceramic craftsmanship, for which the city was well known. The scale
of construction in Babylon was legendary even of its day. And it comes down to
us from many historical and religious texts as a cautionary tale of hubris most
famously illustrated by Pieter Brueghel the Elder in the Tower of Babel from
1563 in this painting. Actually it was square rather than round, but it
communicates the idea. The Citadel and temple complex of
Dur-Sharrukin&nbspcreated under the rule of Saragon II, was also known as
Khorsabad, after the modern Iraq city that bears the same name. Dur-Sharrukin
boasts a number of interesting features, in addition to the fact it was built
by Sargon II between 717 and 706 B.C.E. So, really it was created from the
ground up in a very short period of time. Now, notice the public spaces here
which are quite significant. We'll look at the scale of those a little later. A
couple of firsts here, it's often indicated as one of the first zoned cities
with a rectangular layout measuring about three square kilometers, or about 700
acres. Zone means that there were particular functions located in particular
areas and they were sort of dictated and organized by building codes. The
length of the walls was about 1628 Assyrian units, which interestingly
corresponded to the numerical value of Sargon's name. Again, we see these
cities as the demonstration of the power of rulers, and so architecture and the
urban design takes on this kind of symbolic role. The massive walls were often
four and five meters in thickness, and protected by 157 towers on its sides.
The cities also had extensive gardens and hunting preserves within the walls,
which you can call kind of artificial oasis. Seven principal gates from the
city attracted people from all directions of the compass. Civic buildings
exhibit a high level of skill in construction, and sculptures appear in
monumental scale. In some cases, like this example of a winged guardian figure
at the left, weigh over 40 tons. Notice the scale of civic spaces in this plan,
a large open area surrounded by smaller petitions. Some of these measured over
300 feet across and were places of great gatherings of crowds for ceremonies.
The Persian Empire, sort of peaks with this particular plan. It was created and
established by Cyrus II as Persia takes over Babylon, 539 B.C., and by 525 they
ruled a vast territory of cultivated land and controlled fortified cities
throughout Mesopotamia, Asia Minor and Egypt. Within a hundred years, they
captured the lands between the Indus and the Danube, and created one of the
first great empires in the world until it ended by Alexander the Great in 331
B.C. The city of Persepolis is really kind of the finest example of that
empire. Cyrus the Great located, or founded the city, and then it's pretty much
believed that Darius the Great created the city and built it up to what we see
today. It's probably the best illustration of the legacy of this empire. Notice
that the city doesn't have fortifications, like the previous ones, Babylon, for
instance. The rulers were obviously secure in the fact that they had no serious
adversaries at this moment in time. The city is built on a great tablet of
stone at the foothills of the surrounding mountains that you can see in the
upper left. So this created into a kind of great platform that raises the city
off the desert floor, in some cases over 15 meters. This elevation gives it a
kind of symbolic importance in addition to sort of removing it from the
agricultural construction surrounding it. Let's look at the plan here. I want
to explain a couple of things that actually you can see in more detail in the
textbook. The Apadana, for instance, you can see that grid of dots in the
center of the screen are columns that create a roof structure in which
ceremonial activities take place. There's another one to the right that you can
see there. These are great audience halls and ritual places of gathering. The
ruins that you see there are part of the main entry gate. You rise up off of
the floor of the desert onto this platform, and they were guarded by these
winged figures that were called Lamassu, or Lamassus, plural, that you can see
in the illustration. That gives you an idea of the scale of this construction
there. Now again, on all of these lectures we've been talking about the level
of craftsmanship that's evident in these civilizations. We tend to think about
if they're from this period of time that they must have been primitive in
construction, anything but this. These columns are over ten to fifteen meters
in height to their base, and you can see from the diagrams on the right-hand
side, the axonometrics, that the roof construction is quite complex, and their
understanding of structures in order to be able to hold up this weight was
significant. In addition to that, the buildings become opportunities to
display, through decoration and ornamentation, the power of the state. This
must have been an incredible spectacle coming upon this city from the
surrounding landscape. Let's not forget that surrounding all of these cities
were extensive agricultural constructions, waterworks and villages. In all
cases, the ancient cities are in ruin but life around them continues in much
the same way as it did a thousand years ago.

Egypt Part 1

  Of all ancient civilizations, it's perhaps those that flourished in Egypt
along the Nile between 3000 and 1300 B.C.E. that most capture our imaginations.
Epitomized by the extraordinary pyramid complex of Giza, the accomplishments of
Ancient Egypt are somewhat sublime leaving room in the literature and the media
for dramatic speculations on everything from religion to daily life to
construction, as you see in these cases. In these two talks, we examine the
development of Egyptian civilization along the Nile, patterns of settlement and
the relationship between cosmology and the building arts. The imaginative will
and administrative force required to engage an entire society in the
construction of works of extraordinary scale, even just a single obelisk as we
see here, is difficult for us to believe even when we are aware of the
historical details. The etching on the upper left shows the engineering or feat
required to erect an Egyptian obelisk in the Piazza of St. Peters in Rome in
1586 by the engineer-architect Domenico Fontana, under the direction of Pope
Sixtus V over 2,000 years after it was installed in Egypt, as we see on the
right. Our discussion of Egypt begins after the consolidation of the upper and
lower Nile kingdoms around 2600 B.C. Here a complex social hierarchy had
evolved rivaling that of the Mesopotamian culture, and the thin "liquid spine"
of the Nile we see on the left confines the development within a few kilometers
of the water and irrigation systems. The cycles of flooding and drought within
the vastness of the desert are intertwined with the religious, social, and
building practices of this ancient culture. Like the ziggurats, the pyramid
visualizes the emergence of the primordial mountain between the seas. The
Egyptians increasingly concentrate their cosmology into these constructions,
which are part of an entire ritual landscape, not just the objects of the
pyramids. This links it to the world of the afterlife. In the upper left is a
so-called Benben stone, named after the first mound to emerge from the water,
and the location on which the first rays of the sun fell. It is thought to have
been the prototype for later obelisks, if you look at the top, and the
capstones of the great pyramids were also based on this design. There is even
some evidence to suggest that the tips of the pyramids, pyramidia, were
probably gilded and could be seen miles into the desert. Now let's look at the
development of the tomb. In funereal architecture, it was kind of the
foundation of Egyptian architecture. This diagram shows the evolution of the
Egyptian tomb indicating an increased obsession with the rituals of life,
death, burial and afterlife. The most ancient typology, the mastaba seen in the
upper right, was utilized through all periods of development in Egypt, but
gradually was supplanted by the monumental above-ground tombs of the pyramids.
This is Zoser's pyramid complex at Saqqara. Zoser's tomb was about 1630 B.C.E.,
and it's really, by most scholars, is the first temple tomb complex built in
Egypt of this scale. Again we can see relationships between Mesopotamian
complexes in cities, but an emphasis more on axial alignments or organized
spaces and rituals along a single processional line is beginning to emerge.
Notice there's only one real entry, which is in the lower left, a very thin,
sort of parallel space in the lower left hand corner, as opposed to the
multiple pathways that access Mesopotamian complexes. The Mesopotamian
complexes were most strictly a display of the power of the monarchy, and death
was handled in a very different, less architectural manner. Often in the death
of a king there building construction was abandoned. In Egypt, the
inevitability of death was just the beginning of the ideas and construction of
architecture, which brings us to the pyramids of Giza, and these are separated
by over 100 years from Saqqara. We know these well, but we still imagine them
mostly as objects divorced from the landscape. At top is a sequence of pyramids
that lead up to the Giza complex at the right. You can see the stepped pyramids
to the left at Saqqara, which really more closely relate to the idea of the
Ziggurat. The next one is the Meridum, or the onion pyramid; also the Dashur,
the bent pyramid; and then lastly, as they're working out the ideas, it becomes
a very symbolic abstract form of the pyramid itself. Now remember the stepped
appearance we see today was not intended, and I'm speaking about Giza there for
a moment. Remains of the smooth reflective limestone coating that covered the
surface of the pyramids create an astounding object that we probably can barely
believe. It could have been seen for kilometers into the desert. Before we look
at a cross section of the Great pyramid to understand it as a tomb within an
artificial mountain, let's look at the plan of the complex for a moment. One of
the main points of this course is that architecture can never be completely
separated from its physical and cultural context, and here's a good example.
The pyramids were impressive in their constructions in their own right, but
it's obvious they're essential components of a ritualized landscape that
extends for kilometers in any directions. Surrounding settlements, agricultural
developments and the limitless expanse of the desert are part of this whole
scene. Okay, you recognize the Sphinx in the foreground. That is seen very
clearly in the processional approach to the Pyramid of Chephren, or Khafre, in
the middle size of the three pyramids. You can see the pyramid in yellow, and
you can see the process by which you move from the water, the valley floor up
to the temple through a series of axes and sculptural events, finally
culminating in the tomb. Now here's the cross section of a great pyramid here,
and this is somewhat typical, this is kind of the typology. In number eight
there, you see the subterranean chamber, and that would have been essentially
what would happen with the mastaba in the earlier burial constructions. But by
now, the burial mound achieves an architectural expression of a hope for life
after death and the scale of which will not be rivaled until the height of the
Roman Empire. We admire these constructions for their size, precision of
masonry without mortar, and their timeless air, but for the Egyptians they were
what Kostoff said, "they were monuments of hope, their sole physical link
between this world and that of the gods."

Egypt Part 2

  Incursions by warring factions, particularly from outside of Egypt, such as
the Hyksos, along with other factors gradually ended the theocratic absolutism
of Cheops and Chefren which had resulted in the dominance of the pyramid as a
symbol of the power of the pharaohs. Regardless of this shift, Egyptian
architecture continued to evolve favoring precise craftsmanship, careful
architectural detailing, and increased reliance on a monumental sculpture to
achieve the same desired effects. The mortuary temple of Queen Hatshepsut, one
of the few women rulers of antiquity, is one of the finest examples of Middle
Kingdom design, and we see that here. Records tell us that Hatshepsut's
instructions to her architect, Senmut, were to create an earthly palace for the
god, Amon, associated with the Benben stone we saw earlier, and the creation of
the world. It would be reminiscent of the myrrh-terraces of Punt, the mythical
homelands of the gods. In this aerial of this complex we have Hatshpsut's
temple complex, we see on the right, (and we have another one I'll talk about
shortly on the left) a great, symbolic and economic move. Hatshepsut, like
Mentuhotep's earlier temple to the left, skillfully appropriates the
surrounding mountains as a part of the ritual sequence. The narrative is
perhaps different now, maybe more respectful or humble of the surroundings,
reflecting the changed status of the Pharaoh during the later stages of Ancient
Egyptian culture. Again notice the Egyptian obsession with axial alignment of
spaces that extend far into the landscape. The red line sort of indicates that.
The Temple complex at Abu Simbel created by Pharaoh Ramesses II in the 13th
century BC, is shown here in a 19th century etching. It's a monument to himself
and his queen, Nefertari, and also his exploits of war, and is carved
completely out of solid rock. It's part of the UNESCO World Heritage Site known
as the "Nubian Monuments", which run from Abu Simbel down river to Philae near
Aswan. The site was flooded with the building of the Aswan dam and consequently
reconstructed. You can see the arrow points to the original site of this
monument, which was some hundred feet down below, now underwater, so all of
these sculptures were moved and reconstructed at that upper section. Really, in
a feat of engineering that would have really impressed our Egyptian friends in
ancient Egypt, the UNESCO group moved the entire complex up the mountain to its
current location. You see kind of a construction of that happening on the right
hand side. This interior view of Abu Simbel&nbsp from the 19th century
demonstrates an increasing reliance on monumental sculpture in the creation of
ritual spaces that still speak to the enduring power of the pharaohs. These
inner spaces become more prominent here. Now the pyramid is virtually
disappearing by this point in terms of these precisely located structures
within a rather spectacular landscape. As we saw on the previous project, the
landscape is a background that kind of replaces the scale of the pyramid. One
of the most important temple complexes is located in Thebes near modern day
el-Karnak which is about 800 miles south, or upriver from the Mediterranean.
Thebes was known in the Egyptian language from the end of the New Kingdom as
"The City of Amun," referring to the Egyptian deity Amon-Ra. Constructions on
this site date from about 3000 BCE, which really demonstrates the Egyptian
tradition of adding to a site by the building of programs of successive
pharaohs, which only increased its symbolic importance by making history
visible. Each construction added responded to this context before it was there,
as we see with an alignment between the Temple of Amun-Re on the eastern bank
to the right, we'll talk about in a second, and Hatshepsut's funerary complex
on the western bank. So these rulers were very aware of the kind of legacy of
their hierarchy, and the role that architecture played in demonstrating that
power. Let's go back here for a second. We're looking at the great temple of
Amun on the right on the eastern bank of the Nile. This was the plan of that;
it shows you some of the components. Again you have a walled sanctuary space
that creates a place apart from the regular world and the temple complexes are
actually located within that. There's a lot of open space for gathering. It's
not filled to capacity like the Mesopotamian areas. You can also see axial
alignments going through that forced ritual into a very particular spacial
sequence. That's not to say that there all aligned in a straight line. Often
the axes shift to create strategic pauses, open up to different views, or in
some cases respond to conditions of the site that impose building problems or
opportunities. The space containing a grid of columns you see sort of in the
middle there is called a Hypostyle Hal. Very similar in function to a megaron
or an apadana that we've seen earlier. It's essentially a great ceremonial
gathering space, and it's created by a literal and figural forest of columns.
This is a cross sectional model of a hypostyle hall there. It shows how the
space is modulated in sectional height, higher or lower there, to create a
spatial hierarchy related to a specific ritual procession. You can see the
architectural elements act as a narrative canvas for display of stories,
exploits of the pharaoh, entreaties to the gods, etc., and hieroglyphics,
inscriptions, or paintings, as well as through architectural construction.
These columns here, in the sight of Thebes, demonstrate stories of how they are
actually designed and constructed, not necessarily about what's inscribed on
the surface. The lotus flower columns at Luxor are clearly designed to arrest
the fragile and fleeting beauty of Nile Florae, see to the left, permanently in
stone. That's what's so intriguing about the shift into architectural detail
here in the New Kingdom. The principle building typology that emerges in this
period is the Pylon Temple, seen at Thebes and here again at Abu Simbel, and in
this case, of course, carved into the mountain directly, no free standing
structures. There's a sequence of distinct rooms, as you can see there, one,
two, three four, etc., to smaller but symbolically more important inner sanctum
at the end of the axis. Here's an idealized diagram of that temple. This allows
you to spot a pylon temple anywhere you go. It shows you the principle
components of the pylon temple. The Pylons, or gateways (which are the large
black rectangles, label number one) mirror the hieroglyph for 'horizon,' or
akhet, which was a depiction of the two hills between which the sun rose and
set. So again, the architecture makes visible a mythology that's written and
known. That axis that you see would extend far out into the landscape marked by
Obelisks and other structures, so you would pass through the landscape and
gradually sort of enter into this ritual mountain, no longer a pyramid, but a
fully articulated architectural construction. These images give you an idea of
the scale and construction of temple components, and these are only a few
pieces here, mind you. You can see from the existing ruins the scope of these.
The computer reconstruction of an interior space of a yypostyle hall gives you
some idea of the atmosphere of these interior spaces, which were understood to
be sacred spaces linking this world to that of the gods.

Greek World: Part 1

  In this talk let's look at the emergence of what we'll refer to as Classic
Greek civilization. The evolution is complex but we'll track major archaic
influences from the Minoan culture, and it flourished in Crete, as you probably
know an island off the southern tip of Greece; the Mycenaean culture, which
flourished on several sites along present day Greece; and both cultures
contributed to the development of what we call Classical Greece. The time
periods are roughly the Archaic, 700 to 500 B.C., which was a period of
colonial expansion by the city states. The Classic era is about 500 to 323
B.C., in which Athens, the principle state at that time is a period of
architectural and artistic achievement that we'll focus on. And ending with the
Hellenistic, around 400 B.C. onwards, in the end of the city states by
Alexander the Great, the great extent of the Hellenistic empire. Interestingly,
we'll sort of wind up where Alexander sacks Persepolis, which we saw at the end
of the last talk. First let's look at the city of Knossos in Crete. This site
has a long history of human occupation that dates to about 7000 B.C. Knossos
grew until by the 19th to 16th Century B.C., during the Old Palace and
succeeding Neolithic/Palatial periods, the settlement had a complex
administrative and religious structure, which was exhibited architecturally in
the palace and civic spaces, and had a surrounding population of about 5,000 to
8,000 people. The rectangular constructions over here in color which are around
the center court are called "megarons". Megarons were enclosed spaces, which
were used for poetry, feasts, worship, sacrifice, formal royal functions,
councils, etc., and it's said to be where the guests of the king would stay
during their visits. Very similar to those columnated courts that we saw, the
Apadana in Persepolis, so a very similar function. You can see here, there's
the ruins. You find all these on Google Earth; it would be part of your
exercises to kind of scale and measure these. It's very interesting to look at
the size and the dimension of the public space from these various so-called
ancient civilizations. Here's an interior view that kind of is a reconstruction
of one of the principle megarons at Knossos. Now you can see the columns
flanking a space that's open to the sky in a second level gallery. The grid
sort of organizes or measures that space, and every surface is adorned with
ornaments with the exhibition of craft, which again shows the kind of, the
expectations, the richness and the power of the rulers is displayed in
architecture. That idea that architecture is simply more than providing a space
to live is a theme throughout this entire course. The megaron is also a
predecessor of the classic Greek temple that we'll look at in later lectures.
Now look at this column, it's very interesting. If you see one of these that
tapers from the base up to the capital, and it becomes larger at the top,
smaller at the bottom, these are really called Minoan columns, and we'll see in
a later lecture in Modern Architecture where the American architect, Frank
Lloyd Wright, actually employs a column of these kind of proportions.
Originally the tapered columns developed from the use of cypress trunks, which
were turned upside down and utilized in construction. Later it's reinterpreted
in stone, as you see here. The spans between these columns are limited by the
strength of material of stone and wood. You can see the extraordinary weight
that's placed on these columns and how they transfer from the ceiling down into
the ground. You can see that on this image pretty well. The scale of these fans
is relatively small, so when you get a large interior space, it's going to be
filled with columns. The structures are very complex in section, which contain
many spaces layered on top of one another. You might want to see page 37 of our
text for more details here. The palace also contains sophisticated water
storage systems for drinking, bathing and storm water control. The palace
contains intricate spaces that are seen in the plan and section, and this is
supposedly the location of the fabled Labyrinth of Knossos of King Minos, who
commissioned Daedalus, an architect of that period, to design, and it contained
the Minotaur. You probably have heard that story. In fact, there are many
debates about this, but when you look at the plan you can see where that idea
of this labyrinth of spaces and these kinds of processional pathways that
connect them might have come from, regardless of whether you understand the
labyrinth of mythology was located there or not. Now we'll turn our attention
to the fabled city of Mycenae, a site that appears to have been settled from at
least 2000 B.C. According to legend, King Atreus had two sons, Agamemnon, which
you see this mask discovered by Schliemann in 1847, attributed to him.
Aegisthus, the son of Thyestes, killed Atreus and restored Thyestes to the
throne. With the help of King Tyndareus of Sparta, the Atreids drove Thyestes
again into exile. Tyndareus had two ill-starred daughters, Helen and
Clytemnestra, whom Menelaus and Agamemnon married, respectively. Agamemnon
inherited Mycenae, and Menelaus was regent in Sparta. You know the rest of the
story, Helen eloped with Paris of Troy; Agamemnon conducted a ten year war
against Troy to get her back for his brother, and so forth. Let's look at the
remains of the city. Here we see the Lions Gate that was discovered in the
mid-19th century. Interestingly, Mycenae was thought to only exist in myth
before that time. An archaeologist revealed the Lions Gate with full
excavations of the site conducted by Heinrich Schliemann, the archaeologist who
discovered Troy. Essentially, Schliemann read Homer as a geographic map and it
turned out to be true in the case of Troy. The wall is constructed in what's
called Cyclopean construction, which refers to the immense scale of the stone
blocks. Again, when you see the level of craft here in this wall, the weight of
those stones, weighing tons apiece, you understand this is a culture that knows
about physics and knows about the construction of very large scale structures.
Notice the lions flank a Minoan column, tapered column. It's a heraldic device
that links the site to Hittite and Egyptian traditions. So, it's interesting to
study the physical details of this architecture of these cities, because you
can understand where things came from and how they're connected. This is an
aerial of Mycenae, and you can see its existing north of Athens, is where
Mycenae is located. The digital reconstruction on the right and the detail of
the circular burial site demonstrate how the plan of the city adopts to the
topography of the mountaintop, for instance, not directed by a grid. The site
takes the high ground for symbolic and defensive purposes. Here's an example of
a tholos. A tholos, in this case, is kind of a treasury or depository, but
really in general, a tholos or domed chamber is often referred to as a beehive
structure. It's a principle, sort of, construction that you'll find throughout
this region, and through many periods of history. You might remember in an
earlier talk about archaic architecture that we mentioned a form like that,
which is a tholos. It consists of a circular, subterranean burial area. You can
see here the the dome of that space. It's roofed by a corbelled vault. A
corbelled vault is an arch, you can see there it's triangular, in which the
stones kind of gradually move towards the center, as opposed to a curved vault.
It's approached by the entrance, which is called a dromos, that narrows
abruptly in the doorway, which are called stomion, and actually opens up into
the tomb chamber which is underneath that domed space of earth. It's not simply
hewn out of bedrock; it's actually constructed of very large stones. Tholoi of
this kind, that's the plural, are usually, though not invariably, set into
slopes or hillsides. Here you see a really great view of that interior of that
space, and the craft required to create a domed space with layered stones, and
there's no mortar that's being used to hold this up. It's simply, they
understand the physics of compression and the fitting carefully of stones
together to carry that weight to the ground. Now as we mentioned before, there
are a number of forms that we see, for example the megarons that were
precursors to the Great Temples of Greece; and this diagram, I think, is very
good. In the upper left-hand corner we see a very simple structure that's
enclosed, a single building, which is a meeting space, or a sacred space. You
see that emerging, just down below that into a larger courtyard space, and
eventually it becomes an element in an urban plan. On the right-hand side are a
series of plans of Greek temples that we'll see excellent examples of
throughout the next talk. Look particularly at Example E in the upper right
hand corner. That's an example of a peripteral temple. That means that the
columns surround the exterior space, and there's a sacred or special sort of
interior chamber that's located within the solid walls. We'll look at that, one
of the famous examples, in our upcoming lecture as well. This temple of Athena
Nike, which is on the acropolis in Athens, is an example of an earlier, a very
simple form of that temple. Here you'll recognize the Parthenon as one of the
great examples of a peripteral temple. In the next session, we'll look more
specifically at the evolution of Greek architecture at the Acropolis, and
cities throughout the classic and Hellenistic periods.

Greek World: Part 2

  In this talk we'll concentrate on the construction of public space in Greek
culture, and the evolution of urban planning during the Classical and
Hellenistic periods. Movement in and through time is an important aspect of
architecture, and in Greek culture in particular. As with most pantheistic
cultures, a walk through the landscape is a journey through historical and
religious space and time. We consider the stories of the Greek gods as
mythology, but they were decidedly real to the ancient Greeks. The world was
populated by men, heroes, gods, both living and dead, and consequently, the
physical properties of place and construction took on special meaning. Let's
look at one of the greatest examples of this idea of procession and how
architecture relates to it, how cities were laid out the Panathenaic way. Now
after the great wars of Persia, the Greeks emerged more unified and were aware
of both their strengths and weaknesses. Athens, seen here, was a clear leader
of the resistance, became the cultural center of development. An ambitious and
costly period of artistic development followed that produced a legacy for which
the Greeks are remembered. Much of this energy was focused on rebuilding the
Acropolis, sacked in 480, and then the construction directed by the sculptor
Phidias. Spatial connections to sacred spaces which had existed for generations
became more prominently defined through architectural constructions and
increasingly elaborate ceremonies. The most significant of these was the
Panathenaic way. The celebration of the birth of Athena began at the northwest
gate, Diplyon, and wound its way through the Agora through the Propylae and on
to the Temples on the Acropolis. This gate was also the route to Eleusis where
the cult of the goddess Demeter existed for many centuries and where the famous
religious festival, called the Eleusinian Mysteries, were performed. I want to
point out one other thing here on the lower left; where you see the arrows come
from the Eleusis and on the lower left you see Piraeus, which was connected to
Athens by a series of parallel walls. So the countryside was kind of organized
by a series of routes all leading to Athens, and ultimately, to the Acropolis.
In this aerial view, we see a map and a model of Athens. The route becomes
clearly marked by buildings that grew up along the centuries-old path. Unlike
the Egyptian processional paths that were organized along a strict set of axis,
the Panathenaic way follows a line of the typography. The route moved through
the Agora, which also emerged at the intersection of important paths or roads
from surrounding settlements and sacred sites. The various religious,
political, social, and commercial buildings, such as stoas, temples and other
religious structures seen here began to physically define a space that was
originally created by the natural congregation of people at a crossroads. Here
we see the relationship with the developed acropolis, along with later
additions by the Romans, to the Agora just to the north seen in this small
inset. Although not aligned in any discernible geometric pattern as we'll see
in the Greek colonial cities, the Acropolis and the Agora are orchestrated as
part of a ritual process, or procession. Each structure has its own space but
is also part of a larger sequence. A narrative component that connects and
links one thing to another through space. Three new temples that were formed
during this era and a monumental gateway, the Propylaia, seen in the upper
right-hand image, I think you might be able to make out that number two at the
top of the stairs there. The Parthenon established the Acropolis, not only as
the center of Athens but as a spiritual, cultural, and artistic ideal to be
emulated. The Peripteral form of the Pantheon, number six there in the bottom
left, and you see a section through it at the bottom right, was surrounded by a
layer of columns that bring the visitor from any side towards the entry. Views
of the buildings, city, and landscape beyond unfold cinematically as one moves
along the processional route. Let's take a slight detour here for a minute and
see how two contemporary architects add to this processional space of Athens.
Dimetrios Pikionis created a new landscape plan around the Acropolis in the
1950s, which was constructed of discarded or found stone representing many time
periods of history. Under his direction, skilled masons assembled the path
according to their own ideas about materials and composition which achieved a
timeless effect, and caused one critic to remark "upon first seeing Pikionis'
work, I was surprised to learn that it was only recently constructed." The
Acropolis Museum by New York City architect Bernard Tschumi, which was
completed in 2009, creates a circulation route that narrates a rich spatial
experience from the city street into the historical world of different periods
of archeological inquiry. The visitor's route through the museum forms a clear
three-dimensional loop, affording an architectural and historical promenade
that extends from the archeological excavations, visible through a glass floor
in the entrance gallery, that's the lower right diagram, to the Parthenon
frieze in a gallery with views over the city, and back down through the Roman
period. Now we turn our attention to the spatial order of several key colonial
settlements of ancient Greece. If Pergamon, which we see here located in
western Turkey, appears much like the layout of the Acropolis, it's not a
coincidence It was, in fact, remodeled after the Athenian Acropolis by the
Attalid dynasty, in the second century B.C.E. You can see that it also follows
the line of topography in winding processional paths. Let's compare this city
layout with Miletus. Distinct difference, obviously. The use of the grid can be
seen far back as Chinese settlements or Mohenjo-Daro, in the Indus River Valley
that we've seen. The Ancient Greeks are credited with implementing the grid as
a rational planning tool, a very conscious tool, primarily for newly
constructed colonial cities. Colonial cities such as Miletus, were artificial
constructs by definition which did not emerge out of natural growth over time,
and consequently they're ideal, not being constrained by existing conditions.
The plan of Miletus is often cited as the first rationally planned city, which
many sources attribute to the architect Hippodamus. Aristotle doesn't really
claim that Hippodamus invented the grid plan but was one of the first people to
advocate for its adoption along with a social theory of urbanism. In the
Hippodamian planning method, various classes, artisans, farmers, and soldiers,
received land, and it was organized by the cells of the grid. Size was related
to social status, as you can imagine. In unplanned cities such as Athens, which
developed over centuries, buildings such as the Stoas and the Agora were
free-standing buildings that loosely hugged preexisting gathering spaces. The
Agoras of Miletus and other grid planned cities like this one at Priene, stoas
and other civic buildings became elements of a total design making the open
space formal and monumental without enclosing it. Like Miletus, also in western
Turkey, Priene was planned as a seacoast town. Gradually their respective
harbors silted in and the cities gradually were abandoned. Again you can see
how all building components and civic spaces are composed into a coherent plan.
The city of Paestum in western Italy, just below Naples, follows the same model
adapted to the local topography. The prominence of the restored temples, that
of Hera that's seen here in the upper left, belie the fact that they were an
integral component of an overall plan that encompassed over 300 acres. Despite
the densely, tightly organized plans, public spaces visually connected to the
landscape, which is clearly demonstrated in these theater examples from
Epidaurus, Ephesus, and Milos. The ultimate backdrop of any Greek play was the
distant landscape, home of heroes, gods, and mortal man. We continue to admire
the precision and skill seen in remaining buildings from the Ancient Greeks,
such as the Parthenon, and this ideal was memorialized in this 19th century
replica of the Parthenon in Nashville, Tennessee, of all places. But what made
these structures true cultural monuments was the importance they held in the
daily life of the city and their prominence in the landscape of Greece, not
simply as isolated objects.

Architecture of India and Southeast Asia

  It's interesting to compare cities of the Indus River Valley Civilization
with those in Mesopotamia we've seen earlier. Although little is precisely
known about them, the grid-like organization of the principle sites that have
been excavated, Harrapa and Mohenjo-Daro, appear less hierarchal in terms of
building types and spaces. For example, we don't find monumental religious or
civic buildings have not appeared, make it more like Catalhoyuk rather than
later cities we see, in Mesopotamia, which become dominated by religious and
royal structures of immense scale. Mohenjo-Daro, which means the Mound of the
Dead, was considered a 'planned city,' with a grid-iron street plan and a
castrum-type layout with 'insulae,' or island, separated by Piggot, and others,
like Mortimer Wheeler. Although more recent research has shown that the concept
of a grid-iron plan can't be upheld in a strict formal sense, there's no doubt
that Mohenjo-Daro was a deliberately planned city. It was obviously built
within a relatively short period of time around 2450 B.C.E., and Harappans
erected the buildings on top of a gigantic, artificial mound, or platforms,
situated close to the Indus River, in the middle of an alluvial plain. Very
sophisticated fresh water systems were supplied by a network of wells, sunken
cylindrical shafts several meters deep. They were built of wedge-shaped,
standardized bricks. The waste water and other sewage of almost every house was
channeled into a drain running alongside the street outside. Large bathing
platforms and baths have also been located, as you can see in this lower
right-hand excavation. Trade connections between Mohenjo-Daro and Mesopotamian
cities have also emerged through artifacts found in foundations almost 60 feet
beneath the current surface of the ruins. They also point to a continuous
building program in which layers of construction are placed over the top of
older ones. Now let's take a look at several principle religious structures
that are crucial in understanding place-making in Ancient India. The first of
these is the stupa. This is one of the best examples, well named as the Great
Stupa of Sanchi in India. The stupa is the most familiar of all Indian Buddhist
symbols. It derives its form and primary meaning from the primitive funerary
cairn, or tumulus, that's erected over the mortal remains of a distinguished
person. Really it's a burial mound that's become formalized. According to
ancient texts, the Buddha himself authorized the erection of such cairns for
important men, and further specified that the tombs of a Buddha should be
placed at the meeting of four important roads. This quote suggests that
"whosoever shall there (at the tomb of a Buddha) place garlands or perfumes or
paint, or make salutations there, or become in its presence calm at heart -
that shall long be to them for profit and joy." So you can see these are kind
of the center of a ritual process, not just an object. Now here's the Great
Stupa in the middle of a large, religious complex. Again, it's not an isolated
object in the landscape. After Buddha's death, under the patron of the Emperor
Adoka, he apparently, according to widely accepted tradition, re-divided the
sacred ashes of the Buddha and built a great number of stupas throughout his
wide domain. Some of these, like the Great Stupa at Sanchi, were designed to
honor the remains of Buddhist disciples. Others commemorated sites associated
with the events of the Buddha's life. In the century that followed, stupas were
built to commemorate miraculous appearances of the Buddha, or even events in
his earlier lives, while corporeal relics seem to have multiplied like
fragments of the True Cross in medieval Europe. We can also see several Viharas
or monasteries in these drawings. If you can't read the text, those are the
square shaped structures in the upper left and to the right. Viharas developed
from the Sanskrit meaning a "secluded place to walk." These structures are
associated with sanctuary and refuge, a function not unlike the cloister in a
Christian monastery, although obviously, the specific rituals and symbols are
different. In this example from Bororbudur, which is in Java in Indonesia,
numerous smaller stupas surmounted by a principle one on the crossed axes are
placed on top of an artificial mountain which is in the shape of a mandala. A
mandala, or a sacred diagram, is of Hindu origins, but it's often used as a
formal and spiritual governing device in Buddhist practice as well. The stepped
platform organizes movement into a ritual path that spirals upward towards the
summit through different levels which relate to the path of Buddhist
enlightenment. You can see here the top of Bororbudur looking into the Javan
landscape. In these Hindu temple plans, we can see clearly the use of a mandala
diagram to organize the temples in both plan and section. There's a strong
reliance on axial relationships and bilateral symmetry. Multiple forms are
combined to create different sequences of spaces, such as we see here in this
major example of the Lingaraja Temple. It's one of the more complex assemblies,
and notice how we've taken a series of diagrams and placed them along the
central axis. The two crossed red lines define what's called an axis mundi, or
a world axis, that connects in three axes, (I'm only showing the x and y) it
connects heaven and earth. Usually it focused on a sculpture or an important
deity or religious figure right in the center. From the exterior this axis is
realized in a tower called a Shikhara. You can see that pointed out there, very
obviously. Although most Hindu temples are freestanding within the landscape,
there are a number of stunning examples carved out of solid rock such as the
Kailash Temple that we see here. Now imagine this, there are some assembled
pieces, but imagine a solid mountainside, and over the years it's carved to fit
this diagram. Virtually every surface of these temples contained relief
carvings and sculpture featuring instructional scenes from religious texts.
Taken as a whole, the temples are, in effect, giant religious texts built of
stone. In the Chaitya Shrine, its practice of carving into the rocks was
adopted by the Buddhists around the first century B.C.E. It's seen as one of
the great examples here of which is called Chaitya Hall, or Shrine. Notice that
it contains a stupa at the end of the spatial axis, rather than something
that's setting free on the landscape. Let's turn our attention to some
constructions, specifically Angkor Wat in Cambodia. This is a great medieval
settlement between the ninth and sixteen centuries, a common era, which for
many years has been understood as an "hydraulic city.' An hydraulic city is an
urban complex defined, sustained, and ultimately overwhelmed by a complex water
management network. We see the location of Angkor Wat in upper northwest
Cambodia. This view has received increasing support since the 1990s, when
French, Australian, and Cambodian teams have created new archaeological map
projects using both traditional methods as ground survey in conjunction with
advanced remote radar sensing applications in partnership with the National
Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) and the Jet Propulsion Laboratory
(JPL). These maps revealed a vast, low-density settlement landscape integrated
by an elaborate water management network covering about 1,000 square
kilometers. It's the most extensive urban complex of the pre-industrial world.
Compare the image in the upper top left before restoration of the water system,
when we thought of it as isolated monuments, with that of a more recent aerial
view. You can see that this temple complex is part of a much broader
understanding about a constructed world. Studies like this have greatly
expanded our understanding of these cities as more than an isolated collection
of great monuments. But they also raise important issues about conservation and
the extent of land around these monuments that should remain strictly as an
unoccupied conservation area. These are issues that we'll return to in a later
lecture on Mesoamerican sites in Mexico.
