Modules 4 & 5

Module 4:
This talk emphasizes the relationship between built form and ideas with Ancient
Chinese and Japanese architecture. Our first example, however, is a more recent
communal form in the Fujian&nbsparea which are called a Tulou, or Tulous. They
were constructed between the 15th and 20th centuries and they're set among
rice, tea and tobacco fields in the Fujian area. Tulou are earthen houses so
they have very thick walls, they're several stories high, built along an
inward-looking circular or square floor plan, and they are housing for up to
800 people each. They were built for defensive purposes, you can clearly see,
around a central open courtyard with only one entrance and windows to the
outside only above the first level. Housing a whole clan, the houses functioned
as village units and were known as "little kingdoms for the family" or a
"bustling small city." The buildings were divided vertically between families,
each disposing of two or three rooms on each floor. In contrast with their
plain exterior, the insides of the tulou were built for comfort and were often
highly decorated. UNESCO World Heritage sites described them as "excellent,
exceptional examples of building tradition and function exemplifying a
particular type of communal living and defensive organization, and in terms of
their harmonious relationship with their environment, an outstanding example of
human settlement." Now here we see the pagoda, which is kind of the classic
religious structure coming from China.  And as Buddhism moved eastward, the
sort of [chatra?], remember, which was on top of the stupa, it was a finial
atop the stupa, became a building in itself resolved in the pagoda's overall
design. The parabolic form of the entire pagoda may also owe something to
shikhara roofs of Hindu temples, and the round finial suggests a stupa's shape.
And here you can see the sort of relationship between buildings throughout
periods in culture. Now the Foguang Temple, here the landscape has been
terraced up to create a higher platform for the Main Hall, which we see here.
And one might expect it's set on an axis in the position of greatest
importance. Alignments to the approaching subjects you see are clearly up the
steps in the middle of the platform dividing the structure, which is equally
distributed on either half, and finally you have the god figure in the center
at the highest elevation. In Chinese architecture, important buildings receive
more elaborate structural treatment. The challenge in this temple was to span a
large space in the center without additional columns interrupting that space.
The broad eaves presented an opportunity for the extensive brackets supporting
the roof structure to be displayed and extend into the landscape. The Dougong
structure is what we call these bracketed support systems. The tectonic
solution here is seen at the eave. You know, how do I span something out of
wood with very light elements. And here we can see it, also at the left of a
more recent temple in Singapore, the Temple of the Thousand Buddhas. In a
detailed instructional model on the right, which used to teach carpenters the
craft of dougong construction, the pieces of the dougong are interlocked with a
precise system of joints and pegs which achieve a flexible yet strong
structural system of remarkable visual complexity. And it emphasizes the
Chinese thinking about the integration of art and function. This structural
system eliminates the need for load-bearing walls which become quite light and
flexible. Let's turn our attention to urban settlements and look at the idea of
symbolism and how they're laid out or planned. The relationship between
construction and idea also operates here in this diagram of an ideal ancient
Chinese city. This diagram creates what some scholars called a "holy field"
that organizes material space and orients it with cosmic space. We may not
understand all the religious and cultural implications in depth by looking at
this diagram, but its ordering principles are easiest to read even a millennia
later: a clear precinct established by seven key entry gates, alignments create
regularized ordering of the international space aiding in hierarchical
arrangements all organized around a central space. The Forbidden City in
Beijing is the clearest example of an application of a diagram of this type. In
this case, a main and central axis appears that creates a strong visual and
spatial hierarchy of paths, gathering spaces and structures. The dark areas are
actually part of an extensive water system that creates islands around
important buildings which must be reached by passing over a series of bridges.
Here we see the Hall of the Supreme Harmony, containing the throne of the
Emperor elevated over 90 feet above the surrounding platform, which was the
termination of that axis. It was a visible space, but unattainable to all but a
few high officials. Now let's look at a prime example of Japanese planning and
construction. The Shrine at Ise, which was a Shinto shrine, was dedicated to a
goddess in that region of Katsura. Ise has come to serve as the exemplar of
architecture devoid of unnecessary ornament; an architecture that reflects
extraordinary sensitivity to building materials; an architecture that is
integral with nature rather than being imposed on it. The Germany modern
architect Bruno Taut remarked in 1933, "after the first visit to Ise one knows
what Japan is." The Ise shrine is rebuilt on adjacent sites from the ground up
every 25 years since 690 C.E.  with only minor changes in the design. You can
see here a moment at which the new structure and the old structure co-exist. In
1342 a Buddhist priest by the name of Saka remarks, "In the construction of the
Shrine there are many deep and recondite principles. Under the roof, for
example, the roof ridge, there are cross planks that hold various secrets. They
involve the symbol of the Deity. Then there is the centre or the heart pillar
which is concerned in the festival called the Yamagu-chi-matsuri, and this also
is an esoteric matter." The imperial palace at Kyoto gives another
demonstration of the Shinto ideal of connecting buildings to nature. The palace
complex can be seen as a series of houses connected together by a grid and
composed in a garden. Approach to the building is through a winding path that
goes through the garden which is an allegoric construction based in part on the
Tales of the Genji written in the early second century C.E. The grid pattern of
the plan seen in this katsura palace is determined by the modular dimensions of
the tatami floor mats. It's used as a proportional system dictating the
dimensions of the various rooms. The tatami floor module is traced throughout
the walls and ceilings of the space creating a visually ordered room. Notice
that there are no interior hallways or passages here. Since the wooden
structure frees the walls from the need of support, rooms are separated by
movable, lightweight Shoji screens which slide open and closed to create
different relationships between interior and exterior space. Even nature, in
the form of the garden, has been designed so the building and garden are one.
Notice this relationship between mats are about three by six feet, so you can
see that grid playing out in this diagram, and also this particular diagram
here. Notice that in each room they created a new view of the landscape, which
illustrates again the Shinto ideal of connecting inside space and outside
space, man and nature together. And it's these principles that emerge from
Chinese and Japanese building philosophy that attracted modern architects,
seeking a balance between man and nature, inside and outside a clear
relationship between structural systems that created an open spatial plan and
lightweight walls that are free to move, an ornament that came from the craft
of construction. And here you see a number of works dating from Bruno Taut in
the 1930s up to more recent ones that are looking at Japanese architecture in
particular for lessons that could be applied to modern construction.

Module 5a:
Today we're talking about city planning and public spaces in the Roman Empire.
This map you see here indicates the farthest extent of the Roman Empire that
was reached about 100 A.D. The success of the Roman Empire was in part built on
assimilation of different cultures into the spatial structure of Roman towns
and cities. A complex socio-political structure emerged that had a
corresponding spatial pattern that's evident in urban plans. Many cities
throughout Europe and Asia -- Florence, Bologna, Cirencester and Trier, to name
a few -- have a Roman grid plan at their core. The Roman city followed Etruscan
placemaking patterns through a ritual process of connecting the order of the
city to the order of the cosmos. This sort of "X marks the spot" diagram is an
ancient symbol for the city that we see formalized here in the placement of the
agrimensore's groma, or surveying instrument. We don't know precisely how early
towns and cities were begun. The agrimensor shown here is in the process of
extending the principle axes, the cardo and the decumanus, into the landscape
from an auspicious point of view was influenced by Etruscan rituals of place
making. Of all the Roman colonial settlements, Timgad in North Africa, present
day Algeria, retains its precise grid layout. This ideal plan and the planning
principles behind it will resurface in our discussions of 16th century urban
settlements in the new world. Notice here the red lines indicate the principle
axes, cardo going north, decumanus going east and west. This aerial view of the
ruins of Pompeii is a good example of the spatial heart of a Roman settlement,
and it's that of a forum, sort of an enclosed figural space. The forum is the
precursor to the Italian piazza, the Spanish plaza, and North American square.
An open space or spaces linked together key public buildings that represent
Roman cultural, religious, governmental, commercial, pleasure institutions and
so on. Public space, for citizens at least, extended into major architectural
works that is clearly seen in this map of Rome prepared in the 18th century by
Nolli. Publically accessible spaces are shown in white with buildings rendered
as solid. This is called a figure-ground drawing that designers used to show
public space or the figure of that. It's kind of the social glue to Roman
society. You'll probably recognize the Pantheon in the lower right, that's
number 837. The Piazza Navona is built on the site of the Stadium of Domitian,
in the first century, and follows the form of the open space of that stadium,
and that's seen very clearly on your left. Roman cities grew rapidly by
accretion from originally gridded wall settlements. New construction was added
too, sometimes on top of existing conditions that created a complex and layered
urban scene, not necessarily that clearly ordered. In this diagram of Imperial
Rome the white areas indicate, again, major public spaces that are connected
together through a very complex spatial network that's nested into the hill of
topography. Let's look at the forums, which are the kind of the socio-cultural
heart of Rome. Here we have isolated the various components of the principle
forums from the fabric of the city. There's no domestic structure; there's no
other thing shown except for that. The Imperial Forums, up to the top, which
are very, very organized, very symmetrical and orderly arrangements, are much
more precisely aligned than the earlier Roman Forums seen in the lower part of
the drawings which appears as a seemingly random collection of buildings. Roman
Forum, which we can see more in detail in this 19th century archeological map,
you can see the grid of columns, there is a basilica, there are spaces in
front, the varieties of triumphal arches and other structures that grew kind of
naturally over a long period of time, hence this sort of appearing somewhat
haphazard, but nevertheless, they're very spatially organized. Now let's look
at kind of the Imperial, what's so called Imperial Forums, you can see the
Roman Forum down below, but taken together, this area is the heart and soul of
Rome. Trade, political activities, celebrations, markets, you imagine it, it
happened in the forum. Some scholars estimate that the population of Rome
reached one million at its highpoint. The forums were embedded into a very
dense fabric of housing stock called insulae. Small markets, baths, theaters,
stables, brothels and shops crowding every inch of possible space. Now here in
front of us we see the Roman Forum, the Imperial Forum that's in the top in
grey, and we can see that irregularly formed space by the variety of buildings
that are around it. So, imagine this area completely packed with people. The
best way to do that is go during the summer, when there are thousands of
tourists there and you get a sense of what it might be like every day in the
Roman Forum. Let's compare the order of the Older Forum with that of the
Imperial Forum. The scale of construction has obviously increased as has the
size and openness of the public spaces. Structures added to and complementing
existing placements to achieve a more orderly and visible place have occurred.
Here's one component of that created by the Emperor Trajan. The markets of
Trajan were created by the architect Apollodorus of Damascus, and they
demonstrated planning and engineering skill, and being able to negotiate the
steep incline between the hill below and the lower space at the base. In the
insert photograph, we can see pendentive vaults of concrete and brick that
cover a passage lined by shop spaces on two levels, a very complex social and
engineering feat. Next to that we see the Basilica Ulpia again by Apollodorus
that indicates the increased desire and ability of the builders to span large
dimensions. This created a system of internal spaces equal to or greater in
grandeur than those outside. Now it's interesting, Basilica does not have a
religious, this is more of a social gathering space. In the early days of the
Christian movement many of these rooms were occupied as religious spaces, so
the name is barred. We'll talk about that later.


Module 5b:
Roman designers and constructors gradually amassed a vast storehouse of
empirical knowledge from all parts of the empire and applied it to public
infrastructure such as bridges, aqueducts, sewers, roads, and monumental public
buildings that created an impressive architectural legacy that we still admire
today. In this talk, we'll look at some of the most significant applications of
this knowledge, principally through the Pantheon in Rome. Let's review these
simple structural diagrams that demonstrate the distribution of weight from
vaulted constructions to the earth. All master builders carried this knowledge
of building gained through training and practice in a master-apprentice system.
They understood geometric principles involved in the design and layout of
structures, strength of materials, and organization of men and materials
required to design and build. This memory system was built through experience.
This was their professional foundation, not simply to replicate existing
patterns of construction, but they used this knowledge for invention. No other
single building has captured the attention of architects and the general
public, particularly since the Renaissance, as has the Pantheon. Constructed
between 118 and 128, it has an interior space of awesome scale, and it is the
most completely preserved building of Imperial Rome. A little over 43 meters,
about a 142 foot clear span of the dome was unmatched for well over a
millennium, and not substantially surpassed until the adoption of steel and
reinforced concrete in the modern era. The enormous influence of the Pantheon
is easily traced through numerous buildings from the later Roman period, and
again from the beginning of the Renaissance well into the 20th century. Domed
buildings were not uncommon before the time of the Pantheon, but we know that
none of these approached the scale of this construction. For historians, the
Pantheon represents a kind of culmination of the "Roman Architectural
Revolution" brought to fruition during the course of the 1st century through
adaptation of high-quality concrete that could be more readily used for the
construction of curvilinear architectural forms. Here we see a number of
examples throughout history that were influenced by the form and construction
of the Pantheon. The Pantheon was designed to contain a "perfect sphere," a
universe of sorts, and about 143 feet in diameter with a wall in the form of
skirts dropping down from its circumference. You can see that clearly in the
planned section diagram. In the center of the dome on the top is a 19-foot
opening called an oculus, which was held in place by a bronze ring and backed
by a brick ring, which was integrated into the concrete dome. This oculus
admitted sunlight to brighten the interior. It reduces weight and ties the top
of the dome together structurally. The slightly curved marble floor provided
drainage, and the complex notches in the wall and ceiling tell only a few of
the features of its meticulous design. These sections of the building which
were adopted from William MacDonald's, "The Pantheon: Design, Meaning, and
Progeny," demonstrate the use of the "relieving vaults" that transfer stress
across openings towards vertical supports into the building foundation. The
black lines in the right-hand drawing are sections through those relieving
vaults, and they act simply like they say, they relieve pressure and transfer
it elsewhere. The relieving vaults occurring behind the inner surface of the
dome are clearly seen in the section on the left in that plan view. You can see
the curved surfaces behind the coffers with the layered squares that are seen
in Panini's painting of 1734 of the interior. The coffers, beyond creating
visual depth and interest to the curvature of the dome, significantly reduce
the overall weight that must be transferred to the foundations. This comparison
here gives you an idea of the scale of the dome's 144 foot interior space.
Let's turn our attention for a moment to some additional materials and methods
in constructions, details that you will encounter in looking at Roman
architecture. We are aware that the Romans "inherited" the idea for preparing
concrete from Mesopotamia, but they perfected the formula and they greatly
expanded its use as a major building material. Roman builders used a volcanic
ash known as pozzolana, after Pozzuoli, where it was first discovered, which it
sets by combining chemically with water in the same way as modern portland
cement works. These cements do not need to dry out as does lime mortar. In
fact, they are "hydraulic," which means they will set even when immersed. In
addition to the obvious advantage for underwater construction, large batches of
pozzolana cement will cure relatively rapidly, even in damp conditions. It
could thus be used for the massive, primary structural elements of large
buildings. Furthermore, the early compressive strength of pozzolana cement is
far superior to that of lime mortar. Large wall construction was aided by
filling the interior with concrete and a large aggregate mixture which was
later finished with brick or stone veneers. You can see here in these images.
The thin flat Roman bricks are contrasted with the modern common brick in the
upper left. This section of the Coliseum shows application of these techniques
which was varied for various purposes. We can see the different techniques of
construction are applied to solve specific technical and financial problems.
For example, the lightweight tensile structure of the velarium, or shade
covering, is contrasted with the compressive masonry of which concrete, brick,
rubble walls and tufa are used. Tufa is a very lightweight volcanic stone for a
variety of purposes that suit the necessities of construction. In this section
of the Coliseum, you can see how different stone techniques, for instance,
travertine, which was used as structural cut blocks of complex cross sections
and as a finished surfacing material. Concrete would have been used extensively
for spans and wall construction. And tufa, the lightweight volcanic stone we
spoke of, was often chosen to face a core construction of concrete, and we see
that used here in the coliseum. During the last century of the Republic and
into the early empire, the favored method was to face concrete construction by
regularized, diagonally arranged, square blocks out of tufa which was called
opus reticulatum, and you see that in the center diagram here. These examples
are found throughout the Roman Empire, particularly at Hadrian's Villa at
Tivoli. These small, square blocks were shaped like cones, and their pointed
ends were sort of firmly embedded in the concrete, and they're extremely
durable. The structural orders we're familiar with by now, when we looked at
the Greek civilizations, are expanded and they're employed on a significantly
larger scale than Roman buildings. Again, you can see an elevation on the left
of the Coliseum, and how they achieved significantly greater heights by
employing stacked orders of increasing likeness. Around 25 B.C.E. the Roman
writer, architect, and engineer, Vitruvius, created the first, at least from
what we know, the first formal organization of building principles, which was
called "The Ten Books on Architecture," or "De architectura" in Latin. It
formalizes a set of ideas about architecture and instructional text, knowledge
that had been passed down through the centuries, but was put into a very
precise, organized pattern, called a treatise. As we'll see, this text and its
rediscovery in the 15th century will significantly influence generations of
architects and builders up until the present day.
