Quiz 5: 12, 13, 14

Module 12

The sixteenth-century Protestant Reformation challenged the power and the
authority of the Catholic Church. The church's response, after the Council of
Trent, included the use of art and architecture as a means for attracting and
holding members. Baroque artists and architects used painting, sculpture,
stucco work, gilding, and light to produce dramatic, exciting, illusionistic
spatial experiences for their parishioners. The work was openly didactic and
theatrical, dynamic in form and meaning, a comprehensive approach to using all
of the arts to generate empathy and support for the aims of the Catholic faith.
Sixtus V, a diagram of his plan we'll talk about as seen here, is best
remembered for his efforts to remake the face of Rome during his papacy from
1585 to 1590. Under his orders the Lateran Palace was entirely rebuilt the dome
of St. Peter's completed, wide streets were cut across the city, and ancient
obelisks erected upon them to mark the spot. Various art antiquities were
restored, many others were demolished and quarried; and within the imperial
walls, civil law and architectural order were restored to all quarters. At an
urban level, Pope Sixtus V created an inventive urban plan to integrate ideas
of the Counter Reformation into the daily life of Rome. He did so, of course,
build on earlier urban improvements by Popes Julius II, Paul III, who
commissioned Michelangelo's redesign of Capitoline Hill, and Pope Pius IV, who
established the Strada Pia terminated by Michelangelo's Porta Pia. With Santa
Maria Maggiore at the center, Sixtus developed axial connections to the city's
seven principle churches, which imposed a dynamic, orderly diagram onto to a
vibrant, but chaotic, 16th century Rome. With this plan, the Renaissance
concept of a static, self-contained space gave way to the Baroque concept of
dynamic axial connections between important urban points. It would later
inspire numerous urban plans, such as L'Enfant's Washington, D.C. to Baron von
Hausmann's Paris reconstructions. We will look at six of these conditions and
see how each helps construct a new identity for Rome with relatively efficient
means. The Piazza del Popolo&nbspserved as the most popular entry for pilgrims
arriving from the north, and connecting various religious monuments it
essentially provided a visible spatial connection. This etching from the early
part of the 16th century and prior to the interventions by Sixtus, shows the
ancient Roman wall and gateway to the north, and the church of Santa Maria del
Popolo. Here is Giambattista Nolli's depiction of the plan of the Piazza del
Popolo from about 1748, and it shows the basic elements of the scheme. There
are three wide, straight streets leading south into central Rome, the ancient
Roman wall is still there in the gateway to the north, and the church of Santa
Maria del Popolo and the monastic gardens extending east up the Pincian Hill.
An Egyptian obelisk of Rameses II from Heliopolis stands in the center of the
Piazza. This obelisk, known as the Flaminio obelisk is the second oldest and
one of the tallest obelisks in Rome. It was re-erected in the Piazza by the
architect-engineer, Domenico Fontana in 1589 as part of Sixtus V's urban plan.
Now this is interesting. At the south end of the Piazza there, the twin
churches called the chiese gemelle, of Santa Maria dei Miracoli in 1681, and
Santa Maria di Montesanto in 1679, were begun by Rainaldi, and completed by
Bernini and Fontana. They define the intersections of these three roads.
Although they appear completely identical, if you look closely, just like
twins, there are interesting variations in the details. Just to show that
cities are constantly involving design projects, Architect Giuseppe Valadier's
completion of the piazza with an ellipse, ramps, and terraces, etc. It makes it
into a spatially layered belvedere, and he did this in the 19th century. The
view here is from a terrace just east of Santa Maria del Popolo looking west,
and you can see St. Peters there on the horizon. We'll follow the Via Sistina
from Popolo to the Trinita dei Monti,&nbsp which stands on the Pincio Hill. And
building on this spatial connection, Francesco de Sanctis and Alessandro
Specchi, in 1723, won a competition that connected the upper part, the terraces
of the church, with the piazza down below. The result is called the Spanish
Steps. If architecture can be 'frozen music' as Goethe says, then the Spanish
Steps are an excellent example of this phenomenon. The principle elements are
the steps with their landings, the obelisk, and the church of Trinita&nbspdei
Monte, built at separate times, they're deftly combined by de Sanctis and
Specchi. Here in the Nolli plan it is also apparent how this intervention acts
as a spatial joint between the church above and the Piazza below. Here's a view
from the terrace in front of the church looking west towards St. Peters. It
gives you a good idea of how these religious monuments are linked together
visibly, whereas before they were relatively isolated components within a
dense, formerly chaotic urban fabric. Our next stop is the intersection of
Strada Pia and the Strada Felice, which Sixtus V commissioned four allegorical
fountains to be constructed between 1588 and 1593. The figures of the four
fountains represent the River Tiber, the symbol of Rome; the River Arno, the
symbol of Florence; the Goddess Diana, the symbol of Chastity; and the Goddess
Juno, the symbol of Strength. In this masterpiece of Baroque design the church
of San Carlo alle Quattro Fontane, or San Carlino, as it's often known, by
Francesco Borromini, incorporates the River Tiber's fountain. Here you see that
church on the right hand side, and the fountain as it's contained on the
corner. We're going to return to this plan along with Bernini's Sant'Andrea al
Quirinale, which was built at a later date further down this street. If we go
east along Porta Pia, we arrive at Michelangelo's previously constructed Porta
Pia located at the eastern gate in the Aurelian Walls. You remember it was
commissioned earlier by Pius IV. This etching, this gate, it shows you before
it actually replaced the Porta Nomentana. Vasari tells us that Michelangelo at
the time presented not one, but three designs for the Porta Pia, even three, he
says, "all of them extravagant and beautiful, of which the pope elected to
realise the cheapest," as we see built here today with great praise for him.
Sixtus's choice of Santa Maria Maggiore as the center or central hub is not
arbitrary. The church's name indicates a major papal church, a basilica, and
one of the largest churches of Rome dedicated to the Virgin Mary, and you see
that at Location D. Here it is represented in Nolli's plan. We see the
strategic location of another Egyptian obelisk that marks the extension of the
axis of the nave into the piazza. Here's an aerial of Santa Maria Maggiore with
the infield coming in around it. This dates from the 1930s. You can still see
the presence of that very clear axial relationship that Sixtus set up in the
16th century. San Giovanni in Laterano, or the Papal Archbasilica of St. John
of Lateran is the oldest, and ranks first among the four great "patriarchal"
basilicas of Rome. There were several attempts at reconstructing the basilica
before Sixtus hired his favorite architect, Domenico Fontana, to oversee the
razing of the original church to be replaced with a new building and a new
public space. The axis headed to the west, northwest, connects with a Coliseum,
which by this time had been a shrine unto the Christian martyrs. In front of
the basilica he had the largest standing obelisk in the world, known as the
Lateran Obelisk, re-erected on a new pedestal to mark the location from a
distance. It was originally erected by Thutmose IV before the Great Karnak
Temple of Thebes, we've seen that earlier, later shipped to Rome, by
Constantius II and re-erected in the Circus Maximus. After collapsing at some
point, it was buried under the Circus, disinterred and found its way here to
this piazza. The church was designed by Sixtus's favorite architect, Fontana,
but the facade we see today was redone by Alessandro Galilei, who won the
commission through a later competition. Sixtus V's plan would later inspire
many other kind of urban designs, such as L'Enfant's Washington, D.C., or
Paris' interventions. The brilliance of the plan was a strategic manner in how
it was employed. By superimposing new formal order, on a counterreformation
narrative over the existing city, the plan maintains much of the layers of
history present in Rome, while adding spatial and symbolic legibility to the
existing city.

This talk focuses on three figures that are arguably the best of the Italian
Baroque era: Francesco Borromini, Gian Lorenzo Bernini and Camillo-Guarino
Guarini. Through selected examples of their work, we'll explore the statement
by historian Giulio Carlo Argan: "the Baroque architecture doesn't just contain
space, it defines it." Borromini was slightly older than the others, born in
1599 and died by his own hand, or sword, I should say, in 1667. He was trained
as a stonemason. He was a keen student of Michelangelo's work, and he
understood mathematics and structures and construction intimately. He was
largely self-taught and amassed an exceptional library in a day when it was
very rare. He was very moody and difficult to deal with by most accounts. He
was a constant rival of Bernini. Bernini's father was a well known Mannerist
sculpture in Rome, and he grew up in the business, so to speak. He was affable,
politically astute, received some of the most significant commissions of the
day. In addition to his talents as a sculptor and architect, he wrote plays,
designed theater sets, created pieces from precious metals. Bernini was
particularly adept at the use of sculptural form and light to make religious
themes palpable to the observer. Guarini was trained as a priest and was well
educated in the classics, mathematics, and philosophy. His academic background
differed markedly from the craft or artistic training that most of his
contemporary architects went through. Guarini's travels enhanced his academic
education. Between 1657 and 1659 he stayed in Spain, he studied the Moorish
constructions. And he was in contact with the ideas of the leading
intellectuals of the day, especially in Paris between 1662 and 1666. The
influence of his travels and scientific writings is manifest in his designs
with churches of domed central spaces. The rivalry between Borromini and
Bernini was well known, even in their day, with each competing for choice
commissions. Many people like to tell the story of this figure in Bernini's
great sculpture of the Four Rivers in the Piazza Navona. He's raising his hand
in horror or protection from Borromini's undulating facade of Sant'Agnese in
Agone. The ecstasy of Santa Teresa in Cornaro Chapel, Santa Maria della
Vittoria in Rome, shows Bernini's skill at taking a religious narrative, here
it's Santa Teresa's writings about a moment of spiritual ecstasy, and really
bringing it to life. The art historian, Rudolf Wittkower, says, "In spite of
the pictorial character of the design as a whole, Bernini differentiated
between various degrees of reality, the members of the Cornaro Chapel seem to
be alive like ourselves," that's on the left. "They belong to our space and our
world." "The supernatural event of Teresa's vision," on the right, "is raised
to a sphere of its own, removed from that of the beholder mainly by virtue of
the isolating canopy and the heavenly light." Notice the remarkable plasticity
of the skin in this sculpture of Pluto abducting Proserpina. You can be fooled
into thinking this is a photograph of real people. Bernini is definitely the
heir to Michelangelo's throne where marble sculpture is concerned. Most of
Bernini's architectural commissions were building on the work of others. The
largest scale example is the Piazza of St. Peters, which is spatially defined
by the colonnade that extends the facade and narthex by Modena. We can see in
this plan the addition of the grand colonnade to the right using both an
ellipse and trapezoidal forms that literally creates architectural arms
extending into the city to welcome pilgrims. This form also allowed for him to
compensate for the slightly off-axis location of the obelisk placed there by
Sixtus V, and to Moderno's fountain to which he adds another balancing
composition. By the way, the axis that extends the plaza to the Arno River was
added during the Fascist era by Mussolini. Originally one entered the square
through a small street that gave no hint, quite intentionally, of the grandeur
of the piazza, kind of the baroque surprise. You'll notice the colossal Tuscan
colonnade, four columns deep, that create rhythm, movement, depth, and a sense
of transparency that draws the viewer towards the church. The art historian
Banister Fletcher says, "No other city is afforded such a wide-swept approach
for its cathedral church. No other architect could have conceived or designed
of greater nobility. It is the greatest of all atriums before the greatest of
all churches in Christendom." The best example of a total design by Bernini is
Sant'Andrea al Quirinale in Rome. Its plane is elliptical; compare this to the
renaissance obsession with the circle that organizes centrally domed spaces.
The photograph shows how Bernini creates the illusion that the inside drum is
literally woven into the giant scale portico on the front facade. Now let's
look at the Church of San Carlo alle Quattro Fontane, the church of the four
fountains. Borromini, this is Borromini's work here, is also highly skilled at
working within existing conditions. In the church of San Carlo, affectionately
known as San Carlino because of its small size, he creates a new facade that
incorporates one of the four fountains at this intersection we saw in the last
lecture. The undulating movements of the facade and the sculptural effects
achieved in the plan are very characteristic of Baroque architecture. One of
the most theatrical practitioners of Baroque style, Borromini is said to have
eliminated the corner in architecture. The centrally planned space of the
chapel is inserted into a difficult, odd shaped corner connection, and the
adjacent spaces are resolved by the means of pocheed walls. This term comes
from "Poche", which is French for "pocket", and that's creating spaces in
between two different geometries. The spaces of the dome actually appear to
move and change in shape as you move around in the space, causing one art
historian to say he felt like he was within the chambers of a beating heart.
Some very complex geometric and construction problems are solved here using
systematically deformed coffered ribs of cross, hexagon and octagonal forms.
Many layers of symbolic elements are here too. You might see in this example,
the ring or the crown of vegetation just at the spring of the dome, masking
where it comes out of the drum. Octagonal dormers set into the coffers of the
dome create the sense that the dome is actually detached and continues on to
infinity. The structure of the cupola actually virtually disappears due to the
intense backlighting, leaving the symbol of the Holy Ghost floating in a halo
of light. You can see that in the center. It is interesting to note that well
known contemporary architect, Frank Gehry, once told a television interviewer,
"San Carlino is the greatest building ever designed. It's got all the moves in
it I've ever made." Let's complete this trio of architects with two examples by
Guarino Guarini both in Turino, Italy. This plan and the dome shots of San
Lorenzo are a good illustration of the title of one his treatises: "The magic
of wondrous mathematicians shines brightly in the marvelous and truly regal
architecture." I like what Trachtenberg says about his work, "A Guarini dome,
such as this one, in Church of San Lorenzo, you can see there on the right, in
Turin, becomes a luminous cage of slender intersecting ribs over which floats
the light-filled space of the lantern visible through the complex rib network;
the base of the dome is a circle, and the base of the buoyant lantern is formed
by eight semicircular lobes, each framed by a pair of splayed ribs. It's an
extraordinary configuration of space, light, and mass. It's been described by a
Guarini scholar as 'a great work of hallucinatory engineering.'" And we can see
the influence of these studies of Moorish construction as a comparison between
the Mosque at Cordoba on the left and the central dome at San Lorenzo on the
right. Arguably Santa Sindone, or the Chapel of the Holy Shroud in Turin, the
dome of which we see here, is Guarini's great masterpiece. Late in his life,
and late in the seventeenth century, he would work on the chapel until his
death in 1683. It was to house the "Holy Shroud" relic, a piece of linen
purported to have wrapped the body of Christ and to be stained with his figure.
In his centralized domed churches, Guarini created interiors that have an
apparent height that's far greater than their physical dimensions. He
principally used form and light to achieve this heightened experience. These
were augmented by careful manipulation of color, value, and shade to create an
astonishing vertical extension of space. Guarini experimented with two basic
approaches to achieve this forced perspective in his domes. One, repeating
geometries exaggerate the perspective diminution; in the other, light and
hidden structure permit elevated forms to appear to float above the interior,
creating a visual extension of real space. Guarini fit his new design into the
built masonry shell and its marble facing, which was already in place up to the
level of the large cornice and major order pilasters stacked on top of it,
vertiginously, tier after tier, with scarcely precedented engineering skill,
and it formed the openwork of the dome that has been both the object of delight
and indignation for three centuries. We can see how that works in a cross
section, compare San Lorenzo on the left with the Chapel of the Holy Shroud on
the right. As we step into this relatively small space of the Chapel of the
Holy Shroud under the dome here, it's only 23 feet in diameter, and we look up,
that's this image, we quite literally see a crown of thorns created from the
black marble structural ribs and heavy backlighting. We now realize we're
standing in a void, a spatial expression of the story of the Holy Shroud, the
risen Christ and the absence of the body. Guarini, like Bernini and Borromini,
to which he owes a lot, was able to make experience and emotion, both secular
and sacred, palpable through form, space, light and materiality. Guarini's real
genius lay in his ability to combine geometric, structural, and optical
elements, create interior spaces of unparalleled daring and impact. According
to H. A. Meek, "Guarini's architectural language is so fantastic, original and
strange, it defies any attempt to classify it. Guarini, in a word, is not the
product of an ambience, he is the creator of one."

In France the Baroque takes on a more secular line of development through
significant constructions the royalty commissioned, and particularly under the
reign of Louis XIV. In this talk we'll look at two influential chateaux, or
great country houses, and their influence on architecture, landscape, and urban
design during this period. The narrative royal power and wealth is demonstrated
most clearly in the designs for these two projects. The first image is a
tableaux vivant, or a living portrait of the famous party that opened
Vaux-le-Vicomte and triggered the ire of Louis XIV. Le Vau, Le Brun and Le
Notre were designers commissioned to produce the work for Chateaux of
Vaux-le-Vicomte and its surrounding landscape, and we see here in a tourism ad
from the 1980s, it takes on a real kind of symbolic character. The client,
Nicolas Fouquet, was King Louis XIV's Superintendent of Finances in 1657. The
chateau and its patron became, for a short time, the focus for fine feasts,
literature events, and the arts. At the inauguration of Vaux-le-Vicomte, for
example, an original Moliere play was performed, along with a dinner for
thousands of guests organized by the great chef Francois Vatel, and it was
capped with a spectacular fireworks display. Using the pretext that his
minister's palace was funded by the misappropriation of public funds, Louis XIV
had Fouquet arrested and his designers hired away for the redesign of
Versailles. Ironically, Fouquet's intentions were to construct Vaux-le-Vicomte
specifically for the king, and Versailles's cost would virtually deplete the
state coffers anyway. Now here's Le Brun. He was a theorist and a highly
regarded painter and interior decorator, and he produced, for example, the
ceiling murals for the hall of mirrors. Here we have Louis Le Vau, the
main&nbsparchitect of Vaux le Vicomte, and he creates the new sort of
architectural envelope that updates the original hunting lodge and transforms
it into a palace suitable for the Louis the XIV. This is Andre Le Notre. He was
the landscape architect and principal gardener of King Louis XIV. Finally, a
figure very importantly, we'll only look at briefly today, Jules Hardouin
Mansart, he was the principal architect of the Hall of Mirrors, in the north
and south wings, and he collaborated with Le Notre on the landscape plans. The
French had a fascination with Italian formal gardens since the 15th century,
and you can see influences from the great examples of the renaissance such as
the Boboli and Villa d'Este Gardens in the design of Vaux. But in the French
Baroque, The Garden became a work of art equal to, and sometimes surpassing,
the architecture. The garden at Vaux was vast both in scale and logistics. Le
Notres schemes multiply the geometric formalities of the Italian garden many
times over. Planting schemes became more elaborate with flower beds taking on
the character of embroidered cloth - the "parterre de embroderie" was the
formal name for those colored flowered areas that you could see in the center
of this aerial view of Vaux. This 17th century engraving demonstrates the
disciplined academic spirit of the French view on landscape. It's one of the
best examples, Vaux is one of the best examples of the so-called "gardens of
intelligence." To achieve this mastery over nature by manmade laws and axial
symmetry required a herculean effort. Fouquet purchased and had Le Notre
demolish three villages and move countless tons of earth to make way for this
project. The displaced villagers were then employed in the upkeep and
maintenance of the garden. The construction of this project was said to employ
almost 18,000 workers and cost as much as 16 million pounds, by 17th century
value. The chateaux by Le Vau sits on an island within a large pool, one side
facing the entry approach by carriage and the other side facing the seemingly
endless extension of the main axis. Also prominent in this illustration is the
amount of people who are wandering through the site of the property, it really
defines the idea of 17th century leisure and luxury. Here's a view from the
chateaux. We're up on the dome in the center there, and we're looking from the
central dome towards the front gardens, the main approach. You can see the
ancillary buildings they used to create a sequence of spaces, are figural
spaces that define the entry. The architecture itself is relatively restrained
in formal order and decoration compared to the gardens, as we'll see in the
interior spaces. The surfaces of the interior rooms, a small dining room, for
instance, becomes a literal canvas for Le Brun's talents as a decorator. And
you can see a formal similarity emerging between walls, floors, ceilings, and
the garden, even of course, clothes, objects such as glassware, silverware;
even food gets a Baroque makeover. Another view of the same dining room in a
different time, mirrors are used with great effectiveness to create the
illusion of an infinite interior space. They kind of match the framed views
into the gardens beyond. This view of the library gives you a good idea of the
embroidered fabrics that are based on formalized natural motifs that are
eventually interpreted in garden plans. At the Palace of Versailles, the
construction of a built landscape, an invented landscape, is extended to an
unprecedented dimension. The axis projected into the distance here extends for
more than two miles from the rear of the palace. Everything with a view has
been designed. Nature has been redesigned to fit a particular concept of
Baroque order. You can see that in the plan. This is a plan from that period of
time. Of course, the building is the dark rectangle in the center and you may
notice a very distinct relationship of the Piazza de Popolo in Rome there on
the right hand side with those twin, symmetrical buildings. Now here's a view
of Versailles from the front. This is how it looked before Louis XIV really
began to extend the wings out to the left and to the right. We see the gardens
are shown in development. Things are beginning to come together here. This is a
view of the hunting lodge from Louis XIII era, that's that central building;
and Le Vau enveloped it with two wings that create an entry courtyard that
creates a space there and also celebrates the older building. Here Le Notre
juxtaposes two kinds of nature: "natural" (do that in quotes), and man-made.
Two forms, actually both under tight geometric control. The so-called natural
pool is in the back, surrounded by vegetation, which is all planted and carved;
in the front is a parterre with a very precise geometric pattern. Notice in
this view how Le Notre changed the slope of the land and in effect tilts up the
large reflecting pool and distorts the sense of distance. He makes it appear
closer than it really is. Now we're in the interior, a few interior shots. Here
we look at examples of the collaboration between Le Brun, the decorator, and Le
Vau, the Architect. The first is a very balanced and clear presentation of both
artists' works seen here in the royal chapel. The Hall of mirrors, actually
this is by Hardouin-Mansart, he is the architect of this particular piece,
creates a magical space of light and reflection and it extends the space in all
directions. The architectural details of columns, cornices, and moldings are
subdued in three-dimensional forms and they act as now a kind of canvas for Le
Brun's painterly skill. Finally, this example of Marie Antoinette's
Bedchambers. The surface articulation in the queen's bedchambers virtually
eradicates the architectural detail by transforming it in a pure surface
decoration. Paintings, sculpture, walls, mirrors, tapestries, furniture,
clothes; they all become part of the same composition now. Let's end our
discussion of Vaux and Versailles with some examples of their influence on
later urban planning projects in Europe and the Americas. Here are two plans of
London, after the great fire of 1660, one by John Evelyn, at the top, and the
other more well known by Christopher Wren for London. It shows the use of
extended axes projected from a hierarchy of public spaces and buildings, like
the Baroque are fond of. Here's a town in Karlsruhe, Germany. It was begun with
the central palace that you see there in the middle of the circle, begun in
1715, and it kind of composes, from there 38 streets radiate like spokes on a
wheel to kind of organize the surrounding landscape; and other buildings,
public spaces, and gardens conform to the pie-shaped geometry of the resulting
parcels. It's a kind of state at work to control the land as far as you can
see. You probably have seen this before, this is L'Enfant's plan for
Washington, D.C., actually Andrew Ellicot, who took over in 1792, revises it.
He follows the same idea of a project organizing axes into the landscape.
Originally, major monuments were located on high points within the topography,
kind of relates to the Sixtus V plan for Rome in concept. Baron Von Hausmann
imparted a rational order, sort of a state order on the organic, medieval form
of Paris in the 19th century. It owes its allegiance to both Versailles and
Sixtus V's plan for Rome. This is the Place d'etoiles, one of the best examples
of all that coming together. The Arc de Triomphe was of a later date. Here we
see in 1901, this is the McMillan Plan for the National Mall in Washington,
D.C. in 1901; part of the City Beautiful Movement idea that picks up some of
these Versailles-like constructions. You can particularly see that on the left
hand side with that reflecting pool. The redesign was undertaken for the
centennial of the founding of Washington, and was intended to create a grand
design for the city's core on par with that of the great cities of Europe. Just
as background, the commissions were very distinguished and included Daniel H.
Burnham, the architect from Chicago, the architect Charles McKim, sculptor
Augustus Saint-Gaudens, the landscape architect Frederick L. Olmsted, Jr.,
Henry Adams, William James, Henry James and lot of others. The original
rationale for this plan says: "This is a plan for the location of public
buildings which the government must from time to time erect in any case,
buildings which, however beautiful in themselves, would fail of their highest
effect if scattered about the city in haphazard fashion, whereas if located in
relationship to one another and provided with the proper setting, they would
combine in a harmonious, and consequently beautiful whole." In a way, that kind
of sums up the idea of the Baroque thinking about the landscape and city plans.
And our last example comes from Daniel Burnham, his plan for Chicago. If you
look at Chicago on Google Earth, you can find some of Burnham's ideas were
implemented, but not that many. But you'll see a little bit, a few clues from
that plan, if you study them closely. It's interesting to see how ideas
developed under an absolute monarchy, find their way into the development of
democratic institutions and urban plans in this country.

Just as Indigo Jones introduced the Renaissance to England, Christopher Wren,
who we'll be talking about today, the dominant figure on the architectural
scene in the second half of the 17th century in England, established the forms
and spirit of continental Baroque architecture. In this talk we'll look at some
key examples of his practice and see how ideas change as they move from one
culture and country to another. We will start with his greatest achievement,
St. Paul's Cathedral, which is shown clearly here in a mid 18th century view by
the Italian painter Canaletto. Like Jones, many of the architects we have
studied during the Renaissance and Baroque eras are well known for other
achievements besides architecture. He was a highly regarded scientist
interested in geometry, surveying, and astronomy. In face, Isaac Newton once
called him the "greatest Geometer of our time". During his one trip abroad he
met with Mansart, Le Vau and Bernini, who happened to be in Paris working on
the Louvre project. Following the Great Fire in London in 1666, Wren actually
proposed a new baroque-inspired plan, which we saw in the last lecture, it was
not adopted due to the radical displacement of influential property owners that
such a scheme would have required. He was commissioned, however, to replace the
previous St. Paul's that was heavily damaged, you see an image here, or
virtually destroyed by the fire. Now take a look at Wren's first plan. You kind
of recognize the form immediately, centralized dome cathedral, which he
considered, or many considered the ideal form for a great church. Notice that
it has both Renaissance and Baroque qualities. It's got a circular Greek cross
combined with undulating wall surfaces, an elliptical portico that owes a lot
to his Italian counterparts, like Bernini, in particular. Now here's the final
plan for the church. The scheme was widely criticized as being too "Catholic"
in appearance, and we're talking about the Anglican period in England here.
Wren went back to the drawing board. The final results were an interesting
transformation of both Renaissance and Gothic church forms with Baroque details
and spatial qualities. Using his skills as an astronomer, Wren actually ended
up rotating the central axis of the nave slightly on its site, so it aligned
not with true east, but when sunrise on Easter of the year the construction
began, so sunlight would actually penetrate the nave of the church. If the
urban plan would have been implemented, here's the earlier version we saw, St.
Paul's geometric influence would have been felt throughout the entire city in
true Baroque fashion. And here's the same location, the current view seen in
this Google Earth image, but the public axial street connections and
significant public space that would set apart clearly from the city fabric
never really materialized. St. Paul's was obviously the largest church in
England and Wren's masterpiece. With it he brought a repertoire of
architectural forms and combinations thereof, into the English design
vocabulary. It's a rather encyclopedic building and few people could pull this
off and make it composed. Wren's skill as a geometer was that he was able to
put so many different forms together into something coherent. The facade
features two tiers of paired Corinthian columns like that of the Louvre, which
were framed by towers inspired by Borromini's Sant'Agnese in Piazza Navona that
we've seen earlier. From its two story base a tremendous peripteral dome which
reinterprets Bramante's Tempietto is seen. In this section, it has a set of
three layered shelves you can see there in the image on the right. It solves
structural problems dealing with a massive weight of a dome this size and it
creates an impressive extension of vertical space at the crossing. It's obvious
that Wren has studied dome construction from Brunelleschi forward, and the
creation of an atmosphere from Italian and Baroque masterworks. St. Paul's
survived the bombings and resultant fires during the Battle of Britain and it
still remains one of the great symbols of London and England. I want to briefly
mention one other influential English architect of this period, a little after
Wren, and that's James Gibbs; and that's because his work prefigures the ideals
of neoclassicism in the 18th century that will emerge in the coming lectures.
Gibbs was actually trained as an architect in Rome under Carlo Fontana.
Although he's a bit of an outsider due to his religious and political beliefs
(he was a Roman Catholic and a Tory, and in this time those both were not
exactly in favor) he was considered the successor to Wren and supported him,
and he produced an excellent body of work. He did publish a treatise that's
probably the most widely-used architectural book of the century, not only
through Britain, but in the American colonies and the West Indies, according to
some critics at that time. And as we mentioned in an earlier lecture, Plate 58
of this treatise was an inspiration for the river facade of Mount Airy in
Richmond County, Virginia, and perhaps for the floor plan of Drayton Hall in
Charleston County, South Carolina. He also published "The Rules for Drawing and
Several Parts of Architecture," a textbook which was actually used well into
the 19th century. The Radcliffe Camera that we see here is the earliest example
of a circular library in England. The rusticated base, paired Corinthian
columns supporting the entablature of which surmounts a ribbed dome that's kind
of buttressed by volutes shows clearly his Roman architectural experience. Our
last example, which is decidedly neoclassical, is the Anglican Church of St.
Martin in the Fields on the left. Gibbs' design was widely critiqued at the
time for its unusual combination of a monumental tower rising directly from the
foyer of a temple form. But Gibbs' intuition proved a sign of the times and the
church would be widely imitated, particularly in the United States. The most
famous example is on the right, St. Michael's Episcopal Church in Charleston,
South Carolina, shown here in a documentation photograph from the Historic
American Buildings Survey.

Module 13

Okay, today's lecture is going to be on the 18th century. The title of the
lecture is "Towards Modernity: The 18th Century and the Advance of Reason."
It's important that we talk about a few words that we'll be using. Oftentimes
it's understand, the word "understand" is used; do you understand something,
can you understand this piece of architecture, do you understand this piece of
music, do you understand the person that's in front of you, particularly? I
find that understand is perhaps a little bit of a convoluted and sometimes
difficult word. So what I'd like to talk about is the notion of comprehension.
And how to comprehend something is oftentimes developed by using critical means
of analysis. So part of this course is going to be dealing with how you look at
things, how you see things, and how you reference it against history in order
to understand where you are now, and how architecture then, kind of influences
the way we move, the way we go through cities, and how we actually occupy
constructive space. So the idea of analytical thought and critical thought is
fundamental. Let's just talk a moment about the idea of critical analysis. To
criticize something is not necessarily negative, or pejorative. To critique
something, or to criticize something is to particularly analyze it based on a
body of knowledge that you have in order to analyze it. So it's how you
perceive architecture's role in certain socioeconomical conditions, how you
perceive architecture within political situations, and also in the artistic
realm at a particular time. So when we talk about a particular period, we have
to look forwards and backwards. We have to look at where that period exists and
how, through the lens of history, how our documents and the things that give us
information are seen within our own period. Okay, so what we're going to do,
then, is look at the 18th century, what I'm going to call kind of the joint
between the 1600s and 1700s. So when we start the slides, we'll be looking back
a little bit into the 1600s, into the Rococo period, and then we'll map our way
through the 18th century, and then we'll end it today with moving into the 19th
century.

Hi, my name is Paul Robinson, and we're going to be talking today about
architecture of the 18th century. The title of the lecture is "Towards
Modernity: The 18th Century and the Advance of Reason." A couple of reasons why
it's called that is that in the 18th century, there was an extreme shift
between the notion of what religious thought meant to the development of both
political and artistic and scientific ideas. The notion of reason as a way to
kind of understand the world was fundamentally important. So architecturally
speaking, what we have to do in those regards is to look at what happened
before, in the 16th century to a degree, the 17th century, and also in the 19th
century. We need to kind of go back and forth. So we take what we might say is
a reciprocal journey. We're always looking before and then after in order to
understand exactly where we are. The idea of architecture as a way to
understand a broader context of history is also important. So what that means
is that we intersect other kinds of thinking into looking at architecture, and
this defines the idea of critical thought, in that critical thinking, okay, not
necessarily in the pejorative sense or the negative sense, is a way to
understand things by using a body of knowledge in order to look at it more
deeply. So, regarding the 18th century, we have to see so many things in this
survey. We can't actually end this survey, go through all of the complex issues
that happened in the 18th century, politically, scientifically,
philosophically, and artistically. Architecture fits in there as a kind of
artistic and scientific, and somewhat of a philosophical advance during this
period. In 1714 we had the War of the Spanish Succession. In 1715, Louis XIV
died, France was in deep debt. In 1722, the Afghans conquered Iran. In 1740,
Frederick the Great was crowned king of Prussia. In 1775-83, the American
Revolutionary War, our own war. The first European settlement was established
in Australia in Sydney. In 1789, George Washington was elected the President of
the United States. He served until 1797. The French Revolution was probably the
most important thing for our concern today, but you also need to know that
relative to contemporary things that are happening right now in your world, the
New York Stock Exchange and Exchange Board was founded. In 1792-1815 the Great
French War starts, that's the French Revolutionary Wars which led to the
Napoleonic Wars in 1797. Napoleon's invasion and partition of the Republic of
Venice in Italy ends over 1,000 years of independence for the serene Republic
of Italy. So what I'm saying here is that all of these political and social
conditions move to kind of place architecture in flux, as it does within every
period. Two things I want to talk about particularly before we get into the
actual architecture and the people who influenced it: the notion of the salon
and the academies. Two developments during the 18th century were the idea of
the Parisian salons, where people would actually come together and talk about
different kinds of ideas. Now, these salons also moved outside of France, into
Vienna, Austria, to Germany, and to Italy. So everyone was talking about new
ideas, new ways of thinking, and also in Paris the Beaux Arts was founded,
which was an artistic academy that actually taught students in the idea of
neoclassical architecture and art. And since 1881, it was organized by the
Society des Artistes Francais, and the Ecole is still prevalent today in how we
start to think about architecture. Okay, a couple of things about the slides
we're going to see. Normally, all of the slides that we use will be included in
the test. Not that each and every one is included, but at some point one of
them will be used, and I can't tell you exactly which one. However, I have put
within the slide show asterisks that perhaps mean that this slide is a little
bit more important than others, and you should pay particular attention to it.

Okay, today's lecture is titled "Towards Modernity: The 18th Century and the
Advance of Reason." The actual reason why it's called The Advance of Reason is
the 18th century is seen as a pivotal point in a shift in thinking between kind
of the thought based in religion to the thought based in science, or the
ability for man to understand his or her place in the world based on rational
thought. Okay, the notion of reason is very important for us here because it
affects the idea of architecture, the idea of art, the notion of philosophy,
and how they affect the sciences and the politics at a particular time. The
image that you see in front of you is actually the frontispiece or kind of the
cover, the inside cover, of the "Encyclopedie," which was just that, it was an
encyclopedia that advanced different ideas of the time, to try and show someone
or show people the kind of collection of information in a rational way that
contributes to the existence of a particular time. So, it embodied the
sciences, the arts, and the crafts in a way that somewhat explained how things
were put together to understand who we are and where we are at a particular
time. Again, the "Encyclopedie," the inside of it, so it was inscribed as a way
of beginning to understand the world through the notion of science. Until this
point in time, essentially, we understood our place based on certain, kind of
what we would say more subjective notions in certain terms, so the idea of
religion defined where we were, who we are, and where we are going. The
sciences, especially the science as put forth by Rene Descartes, tended to
start to shift those thoughts, and we look at the 18th century as a period of
when we moved from one type of paradigm, or a set of ideas that define the
world or a particular place within the world, into the notion of science and
the fact that science, or rational thinking, affected the way we perceived
ourselves within the world. Rene Descarte was not an 18th century man,
obviously, but nevertheless, his thinking in philosophies and science affected
every aspect of how people were thinking in this particular point in time. Also
Jean-Baptiste Colbert, 1619-1683, developed a series of academies, first the
Academy of Sciences, the Paris Observatory, the Academies of Inscriptions and
Medals, of Architecture, and of Music, and the French Academy at Rome. The idea
of the academy was important because it brought together a group of people to
start to collectively look at many different things at one time in order to
understand the broader context of existence. Another person who was
particularly fundamental at the time was John Harrison, an English clockmaker
or horologist. He invented the marine chronometer. This act was able to
accurately establish the east-west position, or the notion of latitude and
longitude, and figured out the position of a ship at sea. This helped quite a
bit as far as the notion of travel, how we move through space, actually, and in
some respects, the combination of the Cartesian system and the idea of time
enables us to understand where we are, even conceptually, in points in space.
Edmund Burke, the philosopher, was also part of this, 1729-1797. His philosophy
into the origin of the ideas, "Enquiry into the Origin of Our Ideas of the
Sublime and Beautiful," were very important. It was a 1757 treatise on
aesthetics which garnered the attention of thinkers such as Denis Diderot,
Immanuel Kant. In short, the beautiful, according to Burke, is well-formed and
aesthetically pleasing, whereas the sublime is what has the power to compel and
destroy us. The preference for the sublime over the beautiful was to mark the
transition from the neoclassical to the romantic era. Let me explain that for
just one moment. This notion of sublime is much different because it deals with
what we might call a combination of feelings, to where you were both kind of
feeling secure and you're also maybe feeling a little bit insecure. So it gives
you this, what we might say... interstitial feeling, the feeling of betweenness
that we oftentimes feel, where we're in a situation that's a bit uncomfortable,
yet we know we're not particularly going to be hurt. This was something that
was manifest in writing of the time, literature, poetry, and we perceive
architecture, to a degree, as being able to embody that at certain points, and
we're going to talk about that more a little bit later. Another important
notion is the idea of travel, in that James Cook, in 1728, was traveling the
seas, as many other explorers were, but he happened upon places that are rather
significant for us: Polynesia, and also the Hawaiian islands. He was the first
British ship commander to circumnavigate the globe in a lone ship. He was also
the first British commander to prevent the outbreak of scurvy, so science and
things were developing in ways that were happening very fast, so he's
considered one of the greatest explorers of this particular time. These two
men, Denis Diderot and Jean le Rond d'Alembert, are very important because they
were co-authors of the "Encyclopedie," that I mentioned earlier. So Diderot was
a French philosopher and primary editor of the "Encyclopedie." The work,
"Encyclopedie," took 26 years. It is compiled in 17 volumes of text, and 11 of
illustrations. It presents the achievements of human beings in a single work,
and that is what's important about it is that in these volumes you can look at
kind of the scope of human achievement. Also, Jean le Rond d'Alembert was his
co-editor, who was also a very important person in that time as far as
literature, and also, as I mentioned, within the salons, to gather people
together to discuss intellectual ideas. We also had particular artists at the
time that were very important for us to see. Fragonard, who you see here,
1732-1806, is somewhat of a transitional painter, and he was a bit of a... we
can say rapscallion, to a degree, as far as his paintings were concerned, but
he took a lot of classical motifs and reshaped them into a style that was kind
of fundamentally baroque, and if you look back at the previous lecture, you
talk about Rococo architecture and art, and you also talk about the Baroque
notion, which tends to be a little bit more flamboyant, it has more stuff to
it, more things going on. It's richer, to a certain degree. It is fundamentally
not neoclassical. It's moving away from the idea of classical ideologies and
classical ways of design. So if you look at the one on the left, the letter,
"The Love Letter," you see the woman basically not looking out the window
that's in front of her, but she's looking at you, she's looking at the
observer, but she has something, perhaps a little bit surreptitious in her
hand, something that is not necessarily something that you want to see, so
there's a little bit of, I would say kind of mystery in this image that starts
to provoke a different way of seeing things. And again, on the right-hand side,
"The Swing." It offers up a very rich quality about a particular set of people
at the time. So again, I'm going through a series of artists and musicians and
philosophers to try and help you understand the nature and the context of the
architecture that we're going to talk about. We have Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart,
who was born in Salzburg in 1756 and died in Vienna in 1791. You probably know
who this is. He is part of this period. Also, we have Joseph Haydn. Also, we
have someone you perhaps know quite well, Benjamin Franklin, one of our
founding fathers, at least in the United States. And we look at these images
and they're not necessarily typical images of Benjamin Franklin, but they're
framed in what we might call kind of classical views. He's framed within an
archway and looking at many things around him, so effectively, all the things
around him, the books, the instruments, the chair, the desk, are all about the
notion of kind of intellectual thought, the idea that the intellect, the mind,
is a thing that's starting to take force now in order to understand the world,
and also we know that he was a great inventor. The picture on the right starts
to show us, not with Benjamin Franklin holding up a kite necessarily with
electricity, but with a series of other figures that haunt back to the
classical notion of the polymath, or a man who is extremely knowledgeable about
many different things. I show you this picture, actually a Renaissance picture,
which is by Carpaccio, an Italian painter in the 1400s, because it also kind of
gives you the quality of this notion of space that somewhat defines the place
for someone to exist, and this is the space of the intellect, of the mind,
okay, rather than, perhaps, kind of previously, as we thought about kind of the
space of the subjective, the space of the church, and kind of the unknown
notion, or the fact that we had to figure out where we came from and where we
were going in a way that necessarily wasn't dealing with now what we call
certainty within the 18th century. Certainty and reason and science is taking
hold. Also, Thomas Jefferson, one of our other founding fathers, was active
during this time, 1743-1826, as you know perhaps, the third president of the
United States and also the principal author of the Declaration of Independence.
Thomas Jefferson was many things. He was another polymath. He was a
horticulturist, an architect, an archaeologist, author, an inventor, and the
founder of the University of Virginia. We will talk about that more explicitly,
because as an architect he designed the campus. Okay, we have Robespierre, in
1758, who was also a participant in the French Revolution, an extreme
participant, an activist, who also lost his head via the guillotine. Now, I
talk about the French Revolution because it was one of those main pivotal
points that we can actually reference historically that starts to speak about
political dynamics of different clashes, kind of people who were clashing with
different kinds of ideologies. Ideologies were coming to term, social notions
were very strong, as far as supporting proletariat, and it was extremely
difficult for people to kind of come together with a strong set of contiguous
ideas that defined something that I would say was completely holistic, so there
was a lot of breaking apart of ideas during the 18th century.

Rousseau was also very important. He was a philosopher, a Swiss philosopher.
His ideas influenced the revolution in an extreme way. He was a social theorist
and he developed the growth of nationalism, which is a key figure in the
further development of Romanticism, which we'll talk about, as well. Very
important, too, was Friedrich von Schiller. Schiller was a German poet,
historian, and dramatist; and I look at him as also a friend and influence on
Wolfgang von Goethe, who we'll talk about as well. And so the development of
the sublime was very, very much part of Schiller's notion of literature and
poetry and this idea of bringing the intensity of the sublime event into the
notion of thinking about the world and how you move through, for our purposes,
space and architecture. Also Voltaire was very important at this time. He was a
French Enlightenment writer and essayist, and a philosopher concerned with the
defense of civil liberties. He was, again, kind of a rapscallion, meaning he
was an inciter. He incited through both his literature in kind of an ironic and
cynical way, many different people, and he used satire to make a lot of his
political kind of motivations explicit. Also, George Washington, if we look
back on it, was our first president, and this happened during the 18th century,
as well. So what I have here, again, not unlike these images of Ben Franklin,
we have George Washington who is painted in 1782 as a patriot, as someone who
is a general, and then we also have George Washington as the intellect and the
classical philosopher. This is a sculpture that was done by Antonio Canova, the
Italian sculptor. So we have all of these things happening, the need to
reference history, the need to go back to classical styles, the fact that we're
still in kind of the Rococo area, where kind of excess was still happening, and
we're moving forward to the Age of Reason, where it's going to have a tendency
to start to strip the excess, it's going to strip a lot of the superfluous,
kind of, I would say, kind of cultural baggage in order to define a new
intellectual and scientific way of thinking. Also, Wolfgang von Goethe was very
important for us. He was a German poet and writer and philosopher. The
interesting thing for our purposes about Goethe at this point, is that he
traveled quite a bit down into Italy, also through France, and he studied quite
a bit the architecture and the art of antiquity. He was able to develop this
and put this into a book of travels he called "The Italian Journeys." It's
something that is very important for us, as far as the thinking about looking
at history and the idea of classical antiquity. Bach was active at that time,
Johann Sebastian Bach, the musician. He was German, and based many compositions
on polyphonic chordal progressions. He was also one of the people who kind of
took music and started to make it a transition into what we might call the
Romantic period. Immanuel Kant, also, 1724, German philosopher, to 1804. Now
we're really going to get into something that I'm a little bit more familiar
with, so what I've just done is try to give you a few figures that speak to the
idea of context, so context being the idea of the surrounding conditions, both
physical and intellectual, that start to define a particular period. So you can
say that your context might be, right now, the University of Florida, or a
particular city that you're in. It's the architecture, it's the things around
you, it's the things that are in your house, it's the way you go to school,
it's what you think, it's your friends, it's all the things that influence the
way you might think, or in the future, think about things. So the other thing
about context is it operates in what we in architecture kind of call different
scales. So context is perhaps the city that you live in, but it's also the room
that you go to sleep in at night. It defines how you move through space and who
you are. The gentleman that's on the slide at this point is Johann Balthasar
Neumann; and Neumann was an architect that was really at the joint between
Rococo architecture and the architecture of the 18th century, or architecture
that tended to rely on reason, and because of that, it looked back much
further, back to classical antiquity, to start to consider kind of the
redevelopment of architecture. If you look at the image here, you'll see not
necessarily excess, but a very fluid sense of design, curvilinear forms, and
the juxtaposition of extremes in color between pure white and the other colors
that are there, the browns. So it's a very kind of pure and somewhat excessive
way to start to think about design. It influenced a way of thinking that was
much more lush, and an architecture that had much more dynamic qualities of
movement within it. If you look here at the Residenz at Wurzburger, this
interior, it certainly kind of haunts back to some of the Baroque period,
architectural pieces; and then the image on the right, the nave of the church
in Munich, it is very much about a focal point that speaks to the idea of
centering, and the notion that the thing at the center of the universe is a
god, is God, all right? And so if you look back at the work that Bernini did in
St. Peter's in Rome, you'll see a very kind of explicit reference to this as
far as architectural styles and motifs. The center, the sides, the columns, the
heliocentric columns are all there, and they're starting to move in a much more
explicit way outside of the Renaissance architecture. Also, Giovanni Battista
Tiepolo in the ceiling, okay, an Italian painter, is dealing with this idea of
movement, and continuous focusing toward things that are much more ethereal, so
we're starting to move from the ethereal, things that are potentially unknown,
into things through science and through Cartesian thought, at least, that are
much more defined. Now, the real crux of the lecture today is how the
Enlightenment kind of addressed or started to really reconsider the idea of
classical architecture and neoclassical architecture. A lot of the architects
traveled. They moved throughout Italy, throughout Greece, and they picked up
ideas that had been used in classical Rome and throughout Italy for quite a
long time. One of the architects that was looked at, that you've already
studied, was Andrea Palladio, 1508-1580, and on the right-hand side of the
image you see, basically, Villa La Rotonda or Villa Almerico-Capra, which was
designed and built around 1566. Some essential things that you need to
understand about this image: one, it's a square. If you look at the center,
it's basically bound by a square with four arms that come out, okay, but it's
entirely symmetrical and it's very straightforward in its design. Okay, these
are some images of Villa La Rotonda. It is very classical in that it has the
front portico, it's symmetrically biased, it has a classical motif as far as
the orders are concerned, and you've studied many of these things so far so I'm
not going to get too deep into the ideas of the architectural conditions within
this, but a lot of the architects at this time were looking at this building
and these buildings in Rome, in Venice, in Naples, in Florence, in order to
influence kind of the architecture that's starting to move, the architecture
that's kind of an architecture of reason, an architecture that's starting to
become stripped of this excess, stripped, so to speak, of the superfluous
things that might kind of look at architecture as, that architecture of excess,
and I would say it's what we call a rarified kind of notion of architecture. It
tends to kind of take architecture into essential terms, and nothing does that
quite so well as classical architecture. An architect working in 1723 and 1725
was Colen Campbell. Colen Campbell, you can see, basically took the Villa
Rotonda, as you can see on the right-hand side, and used it as a model for the
construction of this house. It has the classical facade, the dome, and the
proportions are quite similar as well, but basically it's using a series of
motifs, architectural motifs, to kind of reconsider architecture of the
Enlightenment. Another architect, Richard Boyle, 1694-1753, was an architect
and nobleman. He was also at some point made a lord, so Lord Burlington
designed this, the Chiswick House in London, 1725-1729. It also is modeled off
of Palladian classical architecture, okay, or we would say neoclassical
architecture, because Palladio, again, as you remember, is working in the
Renaissance in the late 1400s and 1500s, so it's looking at classical
architecture again, as a way to model kind of a contemporary space;
contemporary meaning that it's part of the 18th century. Okay, if we look at
the plan of the Chiswick House, the section on the left-hand side is very much
about that, showing the main entry and then moving in to the large volume in
the center with the dome. I think there's something we should look at quite
seriously here for a moment, as far as looking at the idea of section, what's
cut through the building and the notion of plan, and looking at how you can
start to make associations between those two, so if I start on the left-hand
side and I move up the loggia into the big front porch there, I can move into
the main space that then has a great, or an extreme volume. If I look at the
plan on the right-hand side, I can also see kind of moving in through the
loggia, it's on the bottom, and then standing there, moving through a tight
space and then coming into the main area of the building, okay, or the central,
the centered focus of the building. The idea of centering and axial and
symmetrical conditions within architecture is going to be quite important for
awhile in architecture, or in the architecture of the 18th century. But before,
as to what our centering was about, the centering of man through the notion of
God, the idea of center is going to be the notion of the center of man himself,
the fact that we can find out who we are by investigating very clear and
scientific notions of who we are on the planet.

Okay, the image that you're looking at here is an etching of Giambattista
Piranesi, 1720-1778. Piranesi was a draftsman, an artist, an architect, and
basically someone who recorded Rome at a very specific point in time. Not only
did he record it, excessively, to a degree, well, some say excessively, let's
just say with great precision, and he produced many, many, many different
drawings of Rome, to where it actually becomes a way that we can see it. I
guess one of the questions of history, in effect, is starting to, or is the
belief that what you see in front of you is actually the reality of what was
there. I don't think we can ever particularly determine whether that is the way
it is or not, but at least we can sometimes get close. Piranesi not only was a
great draftsman or a great technician, he had an incredible imagination, both
as far as the aspects of architecture and the notion of his art, and the
imagination that tended to take some of his drawings and put them into other
worlds, or other ways of thinking. So we can look at this image that Piranesi
did in 1756 of the Roman Forum, and you've probably seen this because if we
step back then we're on the Campidoglio by Michelangelo, if we go forward we're
looking at the Coliseum, so this joint or this space, the Forum space in Rome
that he's drawing here. And he's drawing it in ruins, and that's very important
because he's capturing kind of the state of affairs as the way they are.
However, we don't know exactly what's there because the artist, the one who is
documenting, has the privilege of being able to include certain things, or to
exclude certain things, or to make them the way they are. Now, there have been
plenty of historians who have mapped Piranesi's drawings against existing
things, and it's quite interesting to see the relationship between the drawing,
and the actuality of what is there now. So we can look at Piranesi as a lens,
or as a way to start to see architecture at that particular point. The other
thing that's interesting is you can see the architecture then, or you can kind
of at least look at it in the image, and then start to kind of envision how
it's changed throughout time. Here you have Piazza Navona in Rome. It's an
etching that was published in 1756. Again, looking at public space, looking at
the architecture that defines the public space, at a very specific moment in
time. What's interesting is to look at some of these things now, and I like to
bring in contemporary images because the Appian Way, or the Via Appia, named
after Claudius the Roman censor, began and was completed in the first section
as a military road, and it moved throughout Italy and was a way that Roman
soldiers could move very quickly from one point to the other. As you know, the
Romans were incredible builders and also infrastructural engineers. They made
roads, cities were kind of made more efficient by their ability to construct
sanitary systems, many different things. So the interesting thing here is to
look at how it exists now on the right-hand side, kind of an idyllic picture,
and then note on the map to the left, you have Rome in the upper left-hand
corner, and then moving through central-south Italy to the coast. What you have
here is a Piranesi drawing, and it's obviously nothing like that. In fact, it's
not real. So it's a construction of architectural conditions that are mapped
through history, so it's not necessarily even an ideal situation, but it's
somewhat magical, it's kind of imaginary. So Piranesi starts to kind of
redefine architectural conditions through the imagination, which I think is
very important for you because he takes it even further, to where he does the
drawings of the prisons. These are not real drawings, but they're fantastical.
They're showing people within these very dark spaces and the notion of light,
the idea of material, all of these things kind of go hand-in-hand to construct
a space that has an emotional content, that also has a sense of architecture
that is not necessarily real. Also an architect during this period who was
Scottish, 1728-1792, was Robert Adam. He also was a neoclassicist. Again, you
can see a reference to neoclassical architecture in Italy, specifically, again,
if you think about it, the Italian villa, and Palladio was also referenced
continuously. So this is the south front of Kedleston Hall in Derbyshire,
England. It's designed by Adam in 1757-1759. Also, I think perhaps one of my
most, or one of the aspects of the Enlightenment that's most interesting to me
personally, is that of the kind of the French Enlightenment architecture. This
is an architecture or an imaginary building by Etienne Louis Boullee. It's a
cenotaph for Sir Isaac Newton. It was drawn in 1784, approximately, and it is
not necessarily a real building, but it does, again, start to take certain
motifs, certain ideas from classical architecture, and position them within the
realm of thought that's happening at this time. I think that this is a
fundamentally important image, (maybe you should remember that for test time,
but nevertheless it probably will be on there) but let's look at this more
specifically. It's defined by a sphere, and the sphere is cut in the center by
a line, and it also has a base. So it has this kind of triadic configuration:
it has the base, it has the center, and it has the top, which tends to be the
dome itself. But it really isn't, because if you look at the section, or the
slice through it, it's effectively a universe, it's another world within it.
It's an imaginary world. It's a world that tends to be a bit rational because
the world is defined by the capturing of space through architecture. But it's
not just that, also, it is the mind of Sir Isaac Newton. So the idea of the
universe within the constructs of an architectural edifice then, becomes a way
of perceiving space, and also a way of thinking, saying that architecture is
defined by rational thought, by an understanding of the cosmos in a different
way, and then because of that we can understand where we are or our own
position in space in a fundamentally different way, or we'd say, a scientific
way, a rational way, or a way that was enlightened by scientific and rational
thinking. Again, Boulle, the project for a library in 1785. The library is not
real. It's extremely large, but you can see that it also references kind of
classical ideas of architecture. Okay, the arch in a very explicit way, the
dome in an explicit way on the right, for a project for a metropolitan church,
but they're very grand. These are spaces of the mind, spaces where knowledge,
then, is the fundamental way of projecting the idea of space. So here we have
the mind influencing the way we start to look at the way we move through space,
and in that respect, through kind of the universe itself. So again, scientific
thought is very important. This is the exterior of the Metropolitan Church. If
we go back to the image on the right-hand side, you can see the apse, if you
remember your terminology, kind of, or the moment of where the axis of a
Renaissance or a gothic, or medieval church kind of ends and then it ends into
the dome, that you see more explicitly on the outside. So Boulle, project for a
metropolitan church in 1781-1782. Boulle actually did some, what we would call
concrete or real architecture. This is the Hotel Alexandre, 1763-1766. Now, in
this instance, it's not so grand, it's not necessarily an architecture that is
imaginary, but it's, again, using perhaps a more stripped down or rarified
notion of classical architecture. So we have classical columns. We also have
the idea of centering, and very explicitly kind of refined notions of material,
too. Claude-Nicolas Ledoux, another French architect, 1736-1806. In line with
some of the thinking of Boulle, as well, Claude-Nicolas Ledoux produced plans
for ideal cities, or cities that kind of represented a particular set of
ideologies. In this instance, this is the Royal Saltworks at Arc-et-Senans,
1774-1779. What's very interesting about this is that this starts to structure
a way of thinking about an economy or also a political system that deals with
more kind of industrialized notions of production, so architecture is starting
to move into a place to where it represents and kind of embodies a way of
thinking about things beyond just the occupation of space, but how it
participates in a broader context politically and philosophically. So we're
looking at the idea of designing a city, and this is the actual city as it is
today, not necessarily a city, but the Saltworks is a place to kind of produce,
obviously, salt, saline, but it deals with or it's structured around the idea
of the circle. You can see that it's implied as a circle on the left-hand side
because it only has basically half of its structure constructed, but on the
right-hand side you see it complete within the original drawings that Ledoux
did. So in this place, workers worked, there were agricultural components, and
it was also about the distribution or dissemination of the product that was
produced to a larger constituency. So architecture was starting to become part,
very directly, kind of an industrial way, let's not even use industrial, but
just the act of making things within the context of an architectural space or
an architectural edifice was becoming manifest as a way to realize the
architecture itself. Again, Ledoux was commissioned to create a series of gates
in Paris, and this is the one in la Villette. Look at the classical kind of
ordering that's there. Its form has these qualities of classical architecture.
It has the Greek front, but it doesn't really act as a Greek front. It's
stripped down. It doesn't have any of the ornamentation that you might see.
Also, the columns are very, very simple and they tend to be a little bit
enlarged. The scale is not necessarily as refined as Greek, and perhaps even
Roman architecture, when they are kind of looking back at history. So he's
using geometric forms and certain kinds of classical conditions to define an
architecture that's dealing more with the state of things within revolutionary
Paris at this point. Also, Ledoux did develop a series of buildings that were a
little bit more speculative. This is the house of the gardener in the
ideal-town of Chaux. It's a building I think you should probably know, because
look at it very carefully, again, not unlike Boulle, it has the sphere as its
primary kind of form, and also deals with symmetry. It has the entrances moving
through. So we look at the sphere as being a very important way of starting to
visualize perhaps even heavenly body as it's placed within the context of a
space, or within a city, or on a landscape itself. Again, Ledoux, the project
for the ideal city at Chaux, the house for the supervisors of the source of the
river Loue, published in 1804. Again, an architecture that makes explicit its
use - who's occupying it and where it is in space, using, again, very pure
geometric forms. You will see Ledoux in the architecture of our time as well,
when you start to get into what's called post-modern architecture, we're going
to see some of these very explicit geometric forms, and even Ledoux, as an
architect, references a source for inspiration for several architects. A
drawing that Ledoux did called "Eye Enclosing the Theatre at Besancon, France,"
1847. Okay, the fact that the eye can see space, the eye is looking beyond, and
it becomes somewhat of a metaphor for the idea of what architecture can be
within the mind itself. So we have the light coming down through it, which is
probably coming through a dome. Okay, look back and remember, and do you
remember the Parthenon in Rome? Or do you remember what the oculus did and the
way light was mapped around that? So, we're going to go further and look at
classical architecture. This is continued to be manifest by Gabriel Soufflot,
the Pantheon, we have the interior on the left-hand side and we have the
exterior on the right-hand side. Again, an addressing of neoclassical
architecture in order for it to start to speak about a particular period in
time.

Okay, we're going to end these lectures in 18th century here. It's difficult to
say that a lecture ends with something, because the period itself is so filled
with many things that are kind of transitional. They moved from the period of
the 18th century, they're affected by the 17th century, the 16th century, and
then we're moving into the 19th century, so they're always in flux. And what I
like to kind of say is that they're reciprocal. They're kind of looking at each
other, and then the architecture, and the way of thinking, philosophically
speaking and scientifically speaking, are starting to redefine an architecture
as we move into what's going to be the Romantic period of the late 18th century
and the early 19th century. So as architecture maps its way through, we start
to see it making these kinds of changes. This notion of rational thought, the
Enlightenment, this Age of Reason, is something that's going to be very
important to think about in the next period as far as how we think about
science influencing the notion of technology, the notion of the industrial
revolution and what that means to the arts, and science, and architecture. So I
really want to leave with you this idea that we don't look at the centuries, or
these periods of time just as a singular moment, but as a kind of a continuum
that starts to affect other things at many different points in time.

Module 14

Okay, so we're going to get into the architecture. This is an architectural
history course, right? Nevertheless, I think it's so fundamental that you
understand the general context, and I guess what I'd like for you to do is to
take the previous series of slides in talking about the philosophers, the
artists, and the scientists of this period, and then read a little bit more
about them. It's not in your text, obviously, but it is something that I think
would be rather insightful for you to understand the larger context of the 19th
century, as it is with any historical period, actually. We are going to get
into the architecture now, but we're going to enter through architecture a bit
through the paintings here. Karl Friederich Schinkel was a German architect. He
painted this image, "Morning," 1813. It suggests several things that are about
the Romantic sublime, about the idea of moving into the unknown but kind of
feeling secure about where you're going. It's an idyllic pathway, somewhat
pastoral; the adults are staying behind while the children run forward. What is
really more difficult to see, though, is on the left-hand side there, in the
grass and flowers there are a series of ruins, and there are some classical
columns and some kind of artifacts from a building. This, in my opinion, tends
to represent a movement from, I guess, certain aspects of classical
architecture into another realm, not that Schinkel, as an architect, is going
to leave classicism by any means, as a way of looking at architecture and
architectural space, but I think it's a hint towards where he is going to move,
and where he'll take us. Again, Schinkel, looking at the Romantic environment
in the way Gothic cathedral kind of places itself within the landscape, so it
is not particularly real, but on the other hand it is expressing architecture
as a part of the landscape and that of a large social, perhaps political,
perhaps religious, event. Jacques-Louis David, 1748-1825. You've seen him
before, but in this instance it's a different kind of artist. "Napoleon
Crossing the Alps" in 1801. Napoleon is kind of an idealized form, moving
forward, there's an infinity in the landscape beyond, you don't really know
what's there, it's a harsh environment, and people under the horse are kind of
moving under the control of Napoleon. Charles Wilson Peale documented many
different things in the United States. Meriwether Lewis and William Clark, the
adventurers who documented an awful lot of America. He was a portrait painter,
as you can see here; very distinct portraits of both of the adventurers. Also
"Exhumation of the Mastodon." So he started to record very explicit events as
they happened, so again, painting is used in those terms. Someone who records
events in a different fashion, as you've seen earlier, is Joseph Mallord
Turner. Turner somewhat influenced impressionist art, which we'll talk about
later as we move into the 20th century, but more so I think Turner started to
directly paint, to talk about, to imagine a future based on the idea of
technology and the industrial revolution. Turner put kind of a bodily sense
into his art. You can actually feel the brush, you can kind of feel the paint.
You can sense it as a part of bodily movement, and then it's combined with the
notion of technology, the industrial revolution is made very explicit here in
the sense that the train is moving toward you at a high speed and so, because
of that high speed, you sense it in a somewhat blurred fashion, so it becomes a
mix between the rain and the steam and the speed. It becomes an amalgam of
these sets of ideas in order for us to understand a particular point in time.
The history is starting to change relative to technology and industrial
conditions. "The Fighting Temeraire tugged to her last Berth to be broken up"
is a profoundly interesting image in that you have a steam ship towing a to-be
discarded sailing vessel. So technology and the manifestation of the Industrial
Revolution through various technologies is starting to take place. It's
usurping, so to speak, or it's taking the place of different kinds of modes of
transportation, of ways of looking at the world. Okay, these are a series of
people that I think you need to start to look at architecturally. They are in
your book and I'm going to reference them throughout the slides rather quickly.
Okay, I put this here for you just so you can have this list, and each one of
these can be tagged to your book and we'll go through the slides, as well. So,
one of the things that started to happen during the 19th century is that the
idea of the theory of architecture started to emerge, or people who thought
about architecture in different kinds of ways instead of just experiencing it,
so ideas about what architecture was about beyond just history, or what it
looked like, or how it existed at a particular point in history was one part of
it, but also, another part was what ideas went into the making of architecture
itself, what types of materials, what types of cultures, what did the culture
do or the particular society do to influence the making of a particular
architectural style or a type of architecture, meaning that architecture has
different typologies. For example, a church, a school, might be envisioned as a
type because it has a particular type of form that allows you to understand it
as what it is relative to your own history. So Ruskin was a supporter of Turner
and also the pre-Raphaelite art movement. I'm not going to get into the
pre-Raphaelites, but it's something you should probably look up. Turner is
important as one of the kind of foundational theorists in both art and the idea
of literature in architecture. We're going to come to Schinkel now, again, Karl
Friedrich Schinkel, 1781-1841, a German architect and a neoclassicist architect
that, in my opinion, started to deal very directly with the transition of an
architecture that depended on one technology, and it was emerging as an
accepting condition of another architecture. I'm showing you this contemporary
aerial photograph of Berlin because Schinkel worked primarily in Berlin. What
you see here is the river moving through, and in the center is the large
garden, it's called the Tiergarten. On the right-hand side is the area that
defines East and West Berlin as only defined through the Berlin Wall. It was
placed up in the '60s, and so what we do is we look at the idea of context,
both historically and in a contemporary sense. So we had the Berlin Wall that
was placed up, you can see it moving around the Brandenburg Gate. So the gate
is shown through the destruction of World War II, then later with the wall, and
then as it is today, kind of reconstructed and almost kind of brought back to
its, kind of its original state. It's not brought back to its original state
because the context there now is so fundamentally different and we can look at
that in terms of new architecture juxtaposed or placed next to existing
architectures. So I show you this map because it's a graphical map of kind of
the way Berlin is right now. And if you look up right where it say "U S" that
is effectively where the Brandenburg Gate is. This is an installation which is
a Holocaust Memorial by a contemporary architect named Peter Eisenman. This is
placed right next to the gate. So or at some point in the lecture we're going
to talk about the relationship between the old architecture, or architecture
that we consider kind of historical, it's been there for quite a long time, and
then also what we put next to it and how we start to think about the
relationship between old and new. Schinkel was always involved in this joint or
this confluence between new technologies and the ideal notion of what classical
architecture represented, both as far as the heritage of architecture itself
and also political conditions of the time. So we look at Berlin as where
Schinkel worked. And we can look at the freedom column; just as recently as
this year we've had President Obama speaking there. So it becomes, architecture
in this sense becomes a venue, a public venue, to express itself in many
different ways, so here we have an architecture that defines a link between old
and new, between, also symbolically, the joint between severed conditions
between East and West Berlin, as it was redefined after World War II. Okay, to
Schinkel specifically, this building is an important building for him. It's the
New Museum, or the Altes Museum, designed and built in between 1823-29. Okay,
again, it's neoclassical. It's effectively a very rarified, or stripped down
version of classical conditions, but it doesn't necessarily have the pediment
that you would see in Greek or Roman architecture. It's a long horizontal
building with large classical ionic columns moving across the front. The plan,
if you look at the floor plan, the symmetry is important, and the idea of the
centralized entry is also very important, as well. But what, perhaps, is
equally as important is what you see on the interior portico. You have the
wrought iron handrails. Now, I put this in here because I want you to look at
the relationship between the heaviness of the columns, the classical columns,
and the lightness of the wrought iron and cast iron rails. There is a
fundamental difference between two different types of technologies here: the
technology that allows one to deal with stone as a material, and then metal as
a material, to where we can use metal structurally in different ways. We can
make metal very thin and it still is very stable structurally, and it can span
great distances because of its material integrity and makeup. But as much as
anything else, you have, stylistically, some different things going on, and
it's almost odd and strange, a bit uncanny, in a way, is the relationship
between that rail and those columns, the ancient columns, the ionic columns
representing antiquity, and the new steel starting to represent a point in time
that steel can be used as a modular condition, and also as something that can
be repeated, and it's very thin, so you have a dynamic difference between the
scale of the column and the placement of the cast iron railings. I've been
speaking this for a little bit now, so I imagine that you need to pay attention
to that particular point in that slide. Also by Schinkel, the Schauspielhaus in
Berlin, 1818-21. Again, what's also happening here is the buildings themselves
are becoming larger in the sense that more people are occupying them. We can
make greater spans because technology and material is allowing us to do that.
Yet still we're facing these buildings, we're using kind of classical
architecture as a way to understand their public, and perhaps even political
presence within the space, or the context of a city. So the Schauspielhaus by
Schinkel is an important building for you to look at. It has a classical
pediment on the front and a centralized location for the entry, and it's also
raised off on the ground on an extremely substantial base.

Also by Schinkel, the Gardener's House at Charlottenhof, and Charlottenhof
Palace. These are kind of ideal representations of a different kind of
architecture. The bottom, a very explicit classically defined building. On the
top what might be, we would call now, kind of a neo-Mediterranean revival
villa, actually, in that it doesn't have the classical grandeur of the palace,
but what it does have is very simplified forms relative to Mediterranean
architecture that you would see in the south of Italy. I think the most
fundamental thing for you to understand about Schinkel is this transitional
moment that he starts to make in architecture as far as the use of volume for
different things. So what we have here is the Bauakademie, the school here,
done by Schinkel. It's boxy in a way. It's using repetitive forms to where you
would see previously classical columns doing this. Now what you see is that the
facade of the building, then, is structured in a way that it's repetitious and
the vertical elements tend to be more plithed, so surface is becoming a little
bit thinner here relative to the materials. The other thing that happens is
that there are more windows, so the structure is allowing us to make greater
spans to allow more light to come in. So the relationship between interior
space and exterior space is becoming closer and closer. It's not as separated
by the building itself. And here, in fact, the building was destroyed during
the war, and here is a temporary reconstruction of what the building might look
like if it was reconstructed. Now, this sets forth a fundamental problem, and
what I mean by problem is the dilemma or a conundrum about the relationship
between old architecture and new architecture, or architecture that's been
destroyed, and then to build back in these places or these contexts in
architecture because you need to use this land. So do you build it in the terms
of the way it was, or do you rethink the architecture based in a contemporary
fashion of thinking of now, or contemporaneously speaking? These are arguments
that we will discuss a little bit further as we go on. Eugene Emmanuel
Viollet-le-Duc was an important theorist and architect, 1814-1879. He was also
what we call a Restorationist. He studied buildings, he looked at them, he
looked at their structures, their material languages, and also the cultural
conditions that were used to create the building. He looked an awful lot at
Gothic architecture -- the vaults, the structures that held them up -- and made
rather visionary drawings of how you might intervene within that architecture
with new materials and new conditions. So what you have here is a composition
in masonry and iron. Okay, until now, masonry and iron was not necessarily
brought together directly, but what you have here, instead of large columns
holding up this ceiling system, these series of domes, you have a somewhat
lightweight structure holding it up, that is what we call triangulated -- to
give it structural integrity, and it goes back into the wall. So it's a new
technology, somewhat haunting back or looking back at the Gothic way of
thinking about architecture. And you've looked at Gothic architecture
previously, both in your book and in the lecture on Gothic architecture, so
what's happening here is that the walls are supporting the ceiling and they're
not coming down to the ground, so it's starting to free up space. It's making a
very large space that's void of structure, something that's very important to
think about as architecture tends to embrace modern language. Another very
important theoretician and architect is Gottfried Semper, 1803-1879. He's a
German architect and theorist. Semper thought very directly about some of the
more primitive notions about architecture, or how architecture was kind of
brought forth in very fundamental and essential terms. If we look at these two
drawings, okay, one by William Chambers and the other by Charles Eisen, these
were drawings that started to explore the roots of architecture, the beginnings
of architecture. The one on the right is important for you because it's what
Semper uses in his book to start to talk about the idea of the primitive hut,
or the notion that certain types of fundamental architectural ideas are brought
together in terms of how people utilize materials and space through a cultural
set of conditions. The drawing here is an allegory, meaning that it represents
several different things theoretically. So if you look at it carefully, we're
going back to a simple sense of architecture, or a fundamental or essential
aspect of architecture through nature. So in front of the muse, or in front of
the person pointing to the trees, is kind of the detritus, the ruins of a
classical architecture, saying "We're disposing of this, we're going back to
very essential things in order to understand architecture in a new way; we're
rarifying architecture." So you see the architect's tools, the classical
columns, so we're pointing to a new direction by going back, way back, to very
essential things. So Gottfried Semper was also an architect of note in Germany.
Here we have the Hoftheater in Dresden, 1835, again, a large opera house that
is structured kind of, perhaps ironically, around very strong classical or
neoclassical motifs. Again, a very large building. So the building becomes, as
far as its use, and the properties of how it needs to be, what's going on
inside it, the function of the building is then starting to dictate how some of
the exterior elements are working; but it's still clad, or it's skinned in kind
of a classical set of conditions, in very specific terms. Sir John Soane,
1753-1837, English architect who basically also was a collector. One of the
most notable buildings that he did was the museum that housed his collection.
It was a reconstruction of the interior of a space to represent a collection or
a museum of conditions and things that he had collected over time. If you look
at the inside, we would say that this is a rather eclectic assemblage of
artifacts in order to define an architectural space. So the notion of the
relic, the idea of antiquity, the artifact, becomes an informant of how you
actually move through the space. It occupies the walls, the center of the
space, different places of how you start to move through the spaces to find the
actual contents of the building itself. So it's somewhat eccentric, eclectic.
Nevertheless, it kind of defines a way of understanding how architecture can be
used to house things, to be kind of a collector in a fashion, or a contemporary
reliquary for artifacts. Thomas Jefferson and Benjamin Henry Latrobe.
Jefferson, who you know, Latrobe was hired by Jefferson to work on
architectural pieces in the United States during the 1800s. So in this instance
I thought it was an interesting opportunity for you to look back at antiquity
to see how directly it influenced the work of certain pieces of architecture in
the United States. You can see on the left-hand side the Pantheon in Rome,
originally constructed in 27 B.C. The Pantheon is used as, not a metaphor, but
a direct analogue, a direct kind of informant, so to speak, of the main library
at the University of Virginia. You can see it's not proportionally the same,
but Jefferson believed that classical ideologies were very important,
philosophically, politically, and architecturally, to define a particular
society or a way of looking at society. On the bottom left you see the site
perspective, showing that the library is the focus of the campus itself,
meaning that the idea of knowledge, in the sense of The Enlightenment, is the
most important thing that can embody or influence an education. Again, Thomas
Jefferson, the Virginia State Capitol Building. If we look below we see that
it's influenced very directly by both Greek and Roman buildings, Maison Carree
in Nimes, France, the Roman temple there, and the Parthenon in Athens, Greece,
the 5th century B.C. All right, so again, the use of classical architecture to
define an architecture during the 19th century that was both politically based,
speaking about the ideology of a particular political system. Henry Latrobe,
Roman Catholic cathedral in Baltimore, Maryland, again using classical
architecture, reinvesting the city with a notion of integrity through classical
architecture, and the intentions, I think it kind of fostered as far as even
classical philosophy and what it meant to occupy space. You perhaps recognize
this, Latrobe, the U.S. Capitol Building. Many times architects didn't live to
see the architecture that they designed become an actual building, a material
building. So you see two different phases of the building itself. One, on top,
with a dome that was not designed by Latrobe, and then on the bottom, again,
the dome was not designed by Latrobe. But what's important to note is that
American architecture, especially architecture that is representative of a
particular period of time here, politically, is very important for, I guess,
architecture and its presence within public space, because what's in front of
the Capitol Building is the Mall of Washington, with other significant
buildings.

Okay, so we're going to wrap up the 19th century with the introduction of
technology, new materials, and the movement of architecture into a much more
industrial state. The first building is an interesting building that was
constructed between 1871-72 by Jules Saulnier, Menier. It's a chocolate
factory, and it's hard to see in this image, but it's one of the first
buildings that starts to use steel in a structural fashion, very directly. The
interior has structural girders with cast iron columns and the exterior has a
latticework of steel on it that tends to kind of hold the masonry surface. So
the masonry surface is not what we call load-bearing, necessarily, or
structural, as far as the entirety of the building, so it's an innovative
building but it also embodies the idea of very specific ornamental qualities,
not only of the chocolate manufacturer relative to the way the brick is
inserted into the facade, but also to the cultural context, the context of
other types of buildings that are around it. It tends to work within that
realm. So you see an architecture that's both embracing technology, it's using
very contemporary structural pieces that are put together by steel, and at the
same time, it's using certain cultural, iconographic notions to define its
ornamentation. So ornamentation is a word that we're going to talk about a
little bit here, but at this point in time I'm going to talk about how
ornamentation and structure tend to become wedded together, and then we emerge
out of that into the 20th century. Henri Labrouste, 1801-1875, made very
explicit the use of new technologies, especially in his library in Ste.
Genevieve, Paris, France, 1842-1850. One thing that I think is important for
you to look at is the relationship between the inside and the outside in this
building. If you look at the outside you have the repetitive arches, you have a
very clear notion of the idea of what the windows are doing, letting in light
to the upper story, smaller windows that are punctuated into the base, but on
the right-hand side, you kind of get a sense that the inside and the outside
have a relationship to each other, that they connect in some fashion. So you
can see that the columns from the inside and the vaults tend to line up very
directly with the columns and pilasters on the outside. So here we have a
fundamental or a very direct relationship between an interior spatial condition
and an exterior condition that meets the city. It's very important to note,
also, that the structure here is cast iron, and embedded within the cast iron
are the ornamental details that are both at once structural, and also just that
- ornamental. The other thing is, as you note here, is that these columns are
  very thin. Steel is performing some feats that couldn't necessarily be
  performed before. If you remember Viollet-le-Duc; Viollet-le-Duc had his
  drawings to where steel was holding up large vaults and opening up the
  space, making space freer, making it to where it could be occupied by more
  people and it could function in different fashions, and this is precisely
  what Labrouste was doing in this library. So the section shows not
  necessarily an overabundance of stone, but what steel is doing to free up
  space. Another English architect, Joseph Paxton, designed and built the
  Crystal Palace in London. It's a phenomenal structure in the sense that now
  what's happening is that there is a kind of reduction, so to speak, or a
  thinning of the space of the outside to the space on the inside. The joint
  or the architecture itself is blurring the line. It's dematerializing the
  relationship between inside and outside, so the glass becomes kind of a
  material of choice here. So the Crystal Palace, in England, 1851, is
  notable for several reasons. One, it's a modular building. Paxton was able
  to make or manufacture the cast iron pieces in a particular modular
  fashion, bring them onto the site and then construct them. It was
  constructed very fast, within a year, in order to accommodate the needs of
  the client, and have the building open up on time. Unfortunately, it didn't
  last very long. The Crystal Palace burned, and there is a specific reason.
  One oftentime thinks about steel, right, that steel is a structure that
  doesn't necessarily, or is not affected by fire. It is just the opposite.
  Steel is, in fact, affected very directly and very severely by heat, and it
  yields. So in this instance, the fire completely destroyed the building,
  and so the idea of photography, again, is something that allows us to
  understand its historical context and the actual nature of the building.
  Gustave Eiffel, 1832-1932, is very famous, obviously, because you know of
  his Eiffel Tower, I think most of you do, in Paris. Here we have another
  notion of modular steel, the idea that it can be brought on site,
  constructed. Drawings were made in one place, the actual building, or the
  pieces of the building, constructed in another place and brought on site
  and constructed, and constructed in a fashion that was completely modular,
  so what you have here is a set of drawings, or more or less it's a kit of
  parts, of how each one of these pieces go together to construct, or to make
  manifest this tower that we so affectionately call the Eiffel Tower in
  Paris. And here are a series of construction documents or photographs. So
  here we have the confluence of technology in the sense that we're using
  steel, we're documenting it so we can actually see the construction of the
  building in very real terms, and we have also a monument that goes higher
  than most any building built to this point in time. So it's also a question
  of it being an architecture, a monument, an edifice that kind of defines a
  location in space. So it is this interesting confluence of both
  architecture and architectural monument. It is spatially occupied. You can
  use it functionally and it works as a monument within the city of Paris,
  and is obviously very well known. But it is, in regards to technology, it's
  a very technological building for the time. And here we have an image that
  perhaps some of you have seen and visited. Also Gustave Eiffel, he designed
  the structure of the Statue of Liberty, along with Bartholdi, engineered by
  Gustave Eiffel, the base designed by Richard Morris Hunt, actually an
  American architect in 1886. So here we have several designers, engineers,
  and architects working on the Statue of Liberty. Morris Hunt, 1827-1895,
  was a proponent of classical architecture in the sense that he went to the
  Beaux Arts to study neoclassical architecture, and brought it back to the
  United States. He wasn't the first to do this, but he certainly made it
  quite known and explicit in the Columbian Exhibition of 1893. And really we
  can look at it as the beginning of what we call the Beaux Arts movement in
  the United States. There are many buildings today that we use that were
  greatly affected by that. Richard Morris Hunt, also the Biltmore Estate in
  Asheville, North Carolina, 1888-1895, a lot of architects were hired by
  very wealthy industrialists at this time to build great estates that were
  modeled on architecture from Europe. In this instance, this is the estate
  and the house, the mansion, that Hunt built for the Vanderbilts. So this is
  not in your book, and you won't be held accountable for it, but I wanted to
  talk to you more directly about how European architecture started to
  migrate to the United States. Also, the architects McKim, Mead, and White,
  from New York City, who were architects of the Beaux Arts movement, as
  well. So you see here a combination of different architectures, the
  Palladian arch, or the arch in the window system, made popular by Andrea
  Palladio in the Renaissance. Again the dome, the symmetry, a lot of this
  represents a strong sense of classicism. Next to it you see an addition,
  and we'll talk later when we get into the 20th and 21st century about how
  we start to think about adding to historical pieces of architecture, and
  the addition by Machado and Silvetti. McKim, Mead, and White again,
  Pennsylvania Station, the use of cast iron, steel, and its relationship to
  neoclassical architecture of the Beaux Arts. So large spaces are now being
  constructed by the fact that we can use steel in its most efficient terms,
  and the fact that it can span long distances, so as cities are growing,
  we're starting to see that larger spaces are becoming manifest through the
  use of different kinds of materials in the 19th century. So look back a
  little bit and remember what Schinkel was doing in the Altesmuseum with
  that handrail, and then how far it's come in such a short period of time to
  create spaces that, to this point, really weren't conceived. The grand
  spaces of New York City. Pennsylvania Station, 1910 was when it was built
  and it was demolished in 1963, unfortunately, in my opinion. Again, another
  view of Penn Station and its spectacular structure. What's happening here
  is a large public space is being created to bring a confluence of things --
  pedestrians, trains, cars -- into a sector of the city to where it
  distributes people out. So architecture is being used as kind of a joint or
  a juncture within the city to define both public space, and also the
  necessity of large spaces to hold great amounts of people. I have here on
  the left-hand side Penn Station when it was designed in its Beaux Arts
  style, originally, and then on the right-hand side kind of the new
  renovation at Madison Square Garden. Maybe some of you guys have been to a
  basketball game there. Okay, we're going to talk a bit about European
  architecture in the late 1800s. This is Joseph Maria Olbrich, the Secession
  Building in 1898. At this point, an awful lot was happening in Europe at
  this time, as far as thinking, politics again. The turn of the century at
  this point was very important to the idea of different types of
  intersections of thinking. Olbrich knew the artist Gustave Klimt, and some
  say there is some of Klimt's kind of painting, stylistically speaking,
  embedded within this. And truly, it has kind of the flavor of a Klimt
  painting to a degree, but again, it's an architecture that's relying on
  very specific aspects of classical architecture. It's also a hint towards
  what's going to be called the Art Nouveau style, or the new art style.
  Josef Hofmann, the Palais Stoclet in Brussels. You won't be held
  accountable for this building, but it's happening at the same time and
  works in some of the same principles. Also what's important to note at this
  point in time is that the crafts of the particular places were embedded
  within the architecture in extreme ways, so the notion of how people made
  things became very explicit within the architecture. Not only art, but also
  craftsmanship, the making of different types of sculptural elements
  manifests as a way to understand or to look at architectural edifices. Otto
  Wagner, a very important Viennese architect, 1841-1918. He was also an
  urban planner and a theorist, but he pioneered the Viennese modern movement
  and that's what we're going to concern ourselves with Wagner. The Postal
  Savings Bank, it's in your book, 1904-1912, the exterior facade starts to
  make explicit its actual construction. Okay, so we can see now that the
  proportion of windows to the actual kind of opaque material, the structure
  itself, is becoming balanced. We see a lot of glass and an equal amount of
  structure, but as you look closer you see smaller details on the building
  that start to suggest the way it's made, rivets, bolts, the language of the
  materials themselves become explicit as a way of understanding or looking
  at the building.

The interior of the Postal   Savings Bank, the use of glass for floors, so
structure is becoming a way to both embrace, or kind of to make space, and also
to exhibit itself as a way of understanding the spatial logic of the building.
Details of the Postal Savings Bank-- you can see that the bolts are kind of
left, they're shown, but they're done in a very particular way, a very specific
and actually beautiful way, in order to express the structure. The exterior of
the building becomes both the idea of the edifice, there are certain kind of
details of the building that are kind of left, the industrial details, to a
degree, you see bolts, you see the way things are made. In this regard we call
it a didactic architecture, or it's expressing how it was made and what it
means through its construction. Otto Wagner, Pavilion at Karlsplatz. This
building starts to suggest the movement into the Art Nouveau period, or the
period where kind of art and architecture was very much seen as a synthesis.
This one was in 1898. Otto Wagner, the Villa at Hutteldorf, in Vienna. Again, a
building that's starting to move towards the Art Nouveau and the architecture.
Somewhat eclectic, but it's starting to kind of show signs of kind of a modern
sensibility toward architectural space while still struggling to kind of deal
with classical elements of architecture, so you find that the elements of
classical architecture are becoming less and less relevant as far as structure.
The ornamentation is made more explicit, but still it's combined with some of
the structural elements that Wagner is known for, in that the construction
itself is made explicit or made readily available to the observer and the one
who experiences the building. The architect Antonio Gaudi, Casa Mila in
Barcelona. Gaudi was a Spanish architect, firmly entrenched in the beaux arts,
excuse me, in the Art Nouveau movement of 1905-1907. Now, what you see in this
building is an architecture that tends to be more plastic. It almost looks like
it's moving in its material sense, so he's using materials in not such a
strong, formal, linear fashion, but he's using materials to start to represent
other things: the sensuality of the material, the tactile qualities of the
material, and the fact that materials can start to represent perhaps even an
emotional context of how a particular building may be, how can I say, it feels
within the context itself. It becomes an individual building within that
context. Also by Antonio Gaudi, the Church of the Sagrada Familia in Barcelona,
where structure and ornament and material all kind of combined one to construct
space and understanding or representation of the building within its context.
So here we have an architecture that almost is expressed as bones. They reveal
themselves not only as something that is architectural in the sense of its
technology, but also in the sense of the body, okay. There is a certain kind of
organic feeling to it, a quality that goes beyond kind of the mechanics of
architecture and looks at kind of bodily aspects of the way to perceive space.
All right, so the joints become somewhat kind of animistic in the sense that
they have a certain liveliness to them. They don't feel static at all. They
feel like they're moving and walking within the space. Victor Horta, the Tassel
House in Brussels, 1892-93. Victor Horta was perhaps one of the more explicit
proponents of the Art Nouveau movement, again, where both materials, we see
here stone and steel kind of working in tandem with each other to kind of
define an architecture of movement. Curvilinear forms become very important and
kind of organic symbolism becomes important as well. If we look inside the
Tassel House, you see curvilinear forms that are very important. The column on
the right-hand side is almost tree-like, so it's looking at, kind of analogues
to nature to give a certain quality of the space. You can see that the column
is extremely thin, so what you have here again, if you map it against Labroust,
if you look at say, also Otto Wagner, to where materials, technology, space
themselves are starting to become engaged as a holistic event. So also, in
order to do this it take very skilled craftsmen to achieve this, so the idea of
the arts and the crafts are becoming linked very directly to define
architectural space and architecture as an object. Hector Guimard, 1867-42, the
Metros in Paris were at this point in time designed by him. Again, Art Nouveau
architecture, to where cast iron, wrought iron were being used in turn to kind
of represent different things, and here it has a definite place within the
natural realm, the natural environment, things are very thin, they're very
gangly, they are kind of perceived as moving, and they have somewhat of a
whimsical quality about them, and they, to this day, are very endearing as you
move through the city of Paris. Again, the relationship of materials,
curvilinear forms defining the way Art Nouveau is looked at, at least as far as
the visual context. The cast and wrought iron balustrade on the left-hand side
and then the gate at Castel Beranger in Paris, 1894-1898. So iron and steel
juxtaposed or placed next to stone and concrete is becoming directly wedded
together, and there is a lyricism about Art Nouveau which is important to note,
so that the hand is evident, kind of the maker is evident in the architecture
in quite explicit ways. Moving to the United States, again we start to look at
the relationship of steel and stone, or two or three different types of
materials coming together to kind of define architecture in a more kind of
functional way, to a degree. We're able to go higher with steel, okay. Stone
and concrete, in its raw sense or without any type of reinforcement, has limits
as far as how high and how much of a span it can make. Steel can help us with
that. Okay, so in combination, we can take an architecture that tends to be
artefactual, or it starts to use artifacts of history and combine them in very
contemporary ways of building, so what you see on the right-hand side is a
steel frame being built, then to be wrapped by a stone facade, so you have an
internal frame that is supporting or helping to support an exterior structure,
so the outside of the building's not necessarily holding itself up. It's being
helped by other constituents of the architectural form and space. Adler and
Louis Sullivan, the Auditorium Building in Chicago is something that is very
expressive of not only a very functional building that has to deal with larger
scale spaces, in this instance an auditorium, but also the use of intersecting
materials, again, between steel and stone and the introduction of craft or arts
and crafts is being something that becomes very important as far as approaching
these kinds of buildings at a human scale, when a human being or a person gets
close to it, how do you perceive these new kinds of materials, steel and the
new use of stone in respect to steel? So the application of kind of the
craftsmanship that is seen here becomes very important in order to create a
very tactile environment, and something that Louis Sullivan felt was very
important. The Guaranty Building in Buffalo, New York, 1894, and the Wainwright
Building, St. Louis, Missouri, 1890, both of these buildings have an external
skin of stone that tend to reference historical aspects but are starting to
move very directly into a stronger relationship to new materials. However, if
you look at both of these buildings, the skin is starting to become
dematerialized so that windows are prominent, the front is a grid system that
starts to represent kind of the idea of modular system for steel, and the
intrinsic relationship between the two materials are becoming very close. Walls
are becoming thinner and the relationship between how you occupy space and the
exterior are becoming dematerialized or very thin. Here we have the Wainwright
Building, the construction photograph. So you see here, very directly, what the
steel frame is doing, the steel frame is erected, it's placed up and then the
walls on the outside are moving on the outside of that. It's a way of banking
architecture that we still do today. Again, Louis Sullivan still worked very
directly with the arts and crafts movement. You could say that these are very,
very exquisitely detailed buildings, so what you have here are moments in the
building that become highly detailed, highly ornamental and articulated, so to
speak, and the rest of the building tends to become very, very abstract, okay,
so here we have a box, a very kind of rectilinear building that's accentuated
by highly ornamental entries and systems of where the body starts to move
through, so very important kind of spatial aspects of the building still are
affected very directly by the maker or how someone applies a very specific kind
of crafted technology to the building. Again, details of these pieces,
decorative art details. Okay, on the left-hand side a panel, a column detail at
the capital and then an entry detail. Daniel H. Burnahm and John Welborn Root,
Monadnock Building in Chicago, one of the last kind of stone structural kind of
facades that you'll see in buildings of that time. It's important because it is
a brick building, so the reason that it can be this tall is it is very, very
thick at the base and then as it goes up it tends to get thinner because you
need to lighten up the load, so to speak, so that it won't make the building
collapse with its own materials. Daniel Burnahm and John Welborn Root, Reliance
Building in Chicago, Illinois, okay, effectively we can call this a frame
building or a steel-frame building with a skin on the outside that is not
structural, so there's almost kind of a transposing of the interior logic of a
building, where the interior worked very directly to kind of hold up the
building. Now we can say that the skin of the building is steel and then the
outside of the building is not something that's holding up the inside of the
building, necessarily, in the sense of heavyweight materials. Henry Hobson
Richardson, 1838-1886, the Trinity Chapel in Boston. Hobson Richardson was
particularly affected by neo-gothic work or gothic revival architecture, and
you can see the Trinity Chapel in Boston was manifest in that fashion. Okay, so
he is starting to kind of use revival architecture to kind of define public
architecture at this point in time, so you have all these stylistic conditions
moving in the United States at that time. The Marshall Field wholesale store in
Chicago, Illinois, functionally you see that the store or kind of the wholesale
store is becoming very large scale, so how do you deal with an architecture
that's dealing with an urban or a city block? It becomes highly repetitive, the
materials become simplified, and then the structure on the inside allows larger
spaces to become manifest. Again, and perhaps almost lastly, Louis Sullivan,
the Carson Pirie Scott Department Store. We can say that this perhaps is most
explicit or one of the most explicit buildings of the 19th century in kind of
creating a window facade or a skin architecture, to where now what we have is
we have a bias towards glass, steel frames on the inside of the building, and
the facade on the outside is almost like a curtain, kind of like what we call a
curtain wall, so we can almost say that this is truly the first curtain wall
building built in the United States by Louis Sullivan, to where the internal
steel frame building is supporting up a very lightweight facade. I show this
picture kind of as a transition into the 20th century of going to the moon.
George Melies, A Trip to the Moon, when we move into the 20th century, we're
going to be in fact looking at technology in a much different perspective, so
you can find this actual film on YouTube. You should watch it. It's quite funny
for you. I'll see you in the 20th century. Thank you.
